---
title: 11-5-2016
sidebar_position: 1
---

Answer the following questions. Be brief and to-the-point while answering. Each question carries 2 marks.

Describe the shareholder value model. Create advantage through the use of knowledge and timing. ch1.
The shareholder value model focuses on maximizing long-term value for shareholders by making strategic decisions that prioritize sustainable growth and value creation over short-term gains. By aligning actions with long-term value creation, returning excess cash to shareholders when necessary, and rewarding performance that enhances shareholder value, companies can create a sustainable advantage and drive long-term success.

Describe unlimited resources model.
Companies with a large resource can sustain losses more easily than ones with fewer resources.
The unlimited resources model envisions a scenario where basic needs are met for free, allowing people to focus on other scarce elements like time, creativity, and specialization to create value, even in a post-scarcity society.

Porter’s five forces model shows the major forces that shape the competitive environment of the firm. ch2.
Threat of New Entrants: new firms that may enter a companies market.
Bargaining Power of Buyers: the ability of buyers to use their market power to decrease a firm’s competitive position 
Bargaining Power of Suppliers: the ability suppliers of the inputs of a product or service to lower a firm’s competitive position 
Threat of Substitutes: providers of equivalent or superior alternative products
Industry Competitors: current competitors for the same product.
List  in detail the Two broad categories of Porter’s Value Chain Model
Primary activities – relate directly to the value created in a product or service.
Support activities – make it possible for the primary activities to exist and remain coordinated.

Who in the organization has the responsibility to initiate, supply information for, approve, implement, and control various types of decisions? ch 3
Ideally the person with the most information and in the best position should have these rights.

Define a flat organizational structure and its disadvantages or restrictions.
Decision-making is centralized. However, this organizational structure often becomes less flexible as the organization grows.

What is a virtual organization and which is the most widely used mode of communications in it. ch 4.
A structure that makes it possible for individuals to work for an organization and live anywhere. A structure that makes it possible for individuals to work for an organization and live anywhere.

Define social networking with a few examples.
A web-based service that allows its members to create a public profile with their interests and expertise, post text and pictures and all manner of data, list other users with whom they share a connection, and view and communicate openly or privately with their list of connections and those made by others within the system (MySpace, Facebook, etc.).  

Explain various types of organizational structures for IT governance.
Centralized – bring together all staff, hardware, software, data, and processing into a single location.
Decentralized – the components in the centralized structure are scattered in different locations to address local business needs.
Federalism – a combination of centralized and decentralized structures.

What is cloud computing? Mention its utility and risks in business application.
Utility computing – where computing can be purchased as need arises or decreases.
Managers can choose between using the architecture, a platform, or an entire application (like SAP).
Provides significant incentives for handling peak or new computing needs.
Business case for using includes:
Better managed server costs
Energy costs
Staff costs
Managers must also understand the risks, which include:
Dependence on third-party supplier
Customization of application to work on cloud
List the names of three Normative Theories of Business Ethics.

Three theories of business ethics are examined to develop and apply to particular challenges that they face  
Stockholder theory
Stakeholder theory
Social contract theory

List and explain the areas related to Control of Information summarized by privacy, accuracy, property and accessibility.
Privacy:
Privacy – “the right to be left alone”.
What information must a person reveal to others?
Managers must be aware of regulations that are in place regarding the authorized collection, disclosure and use of personal information.
Accuracy
Who is responsible for the reliability and accuracy of Information?
Managers must establish controls to ensure that information is accurate.
Data entry errors must be controlled and managed carefully.
Data must also be kept up to date.
Property
Who owns this information (data or images, etc)? 
Managers must understand the legal rights and duties accorded to proper ownership.
Accessibility
What information does a person or organization have a right to obtain?
This access needs to be controlled to those who have a right to see and use it (identity theft).
Adequate security measures must be in place on their partners’ end.

What is green computing? List the strategies the companies are adopting to respond to green computing.
Concerned with using computing resources efficiently.
Companies are working to become more efficient by:
Replacing older systems with more energy efficient ones.
Moving workloads based on energy efficiency.
Using most power inefficient servers only at peak usage times.
Improving data center air flows.
Turning to virtualization.

Explain the Sourcing Decision Cycle Framework.
Sourcing involves many decisions.
The first step is the make or buy decision.
If buy is selected then the company must decide where.
If the company decides to go offshore it must decide if the offshore company is near or far.
Periodic evaluation takes place.
Continual evaluation is needed to determine if the arrangement is satisfactory or not (either for outsourcing or insourcing).

Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the COBIT framework deals with:
management’s assessment of internal controls
increasing security of IT firms
implementation of Stakeholders theory
All the above

Control Objectives, as created by COSO, for management and auditors that focused on dealing with risks to internal control include:
Security, Compliance, and Stakeholders
Stockholders, Security, and Social Welfare
Operations, Compliance and Financial reporting
Social Welfare, HR Development, Security

Green Computing concerns with:
Production of agile computing devices
Production of IT products
Efficiency of Computing resources
All the above

A decisive action rooted in principles that express what is right and important and about action that is publicly defensible and personally supportable is known as:
Philosophy
Moral Reasoning
Ethics
Social Welfare

The major strategies that are being employed in Captive Centers include:
Network Captive
Digest Captive
Both a & b 
None of the above

In Nearshoring, client company hopes to benefit from one or more ways of being close:
Economically
Temporally
Both a & b
None of the above

Major drivers that favor Insourcing include:
security or confidentiality of the product
keep core competencies in-house
In-house IT personnel
All the above

To avoid outsourcing pitfalls:
Do not establish short-term suppliers contract
Negotiate  solely on price
Carefully evaluate your company’s own capabilities
All the above

According to Carmel and Tjia, India comes under which tier of software exporting nations?
Emerging Software Exporting Nations
Infant Stage Software Exporting Nations
Mature Software Exporting Nations
None of the above

Crowdsourcing is used for:
Increase efficiency
Increase agility
Fill skill gaps
All the above

PAPA is :
Privacy All Property Accessed 
Privacy Accuracy Property Accessibility
Private All Property Acquired 
Privacy All Properly Accessed 

Considering the needs of a society with no corporations or other complex business arrangements is the:
Stockholder Theory
Stakeholder Theory
Social Contract Theory
Investment Contact theory

The three control objectives created by COSO for management and auditors that focused on dealing with risks to internal control are:
Stockholder, Stakeholder, Social contract
Operations, Compliance, Financial reporting
Treadway, Commission, Committee
Generally Accepted Accounting

SoX stands for:
Sarbanes Oxley Act
Sarbanes Oxley Action
Seven Axioms Actions
None of the above

The triple bottom line for Green programs are:
Economic, Social, Environmental
Privacy, Accuracy, Property
Efficiency, Agility, Feasibility
Analytic, Numeric, Digital

The three major stages of BCP are:
Business, Continue, Planning
Pre-planning, Post Planning, Only Planning
Pre-planning, Planning, Post-planning
Plan, Implement, Execute

Strategic time frame is:
very applicable to infrastructure
not applicable to architecture
very applicable to architecture
none of the above

The type of software used in an SOA architecture is often referred to as:
SaaS
SAP
c/s application
all the above

An overseas subsidiary that performs core business processes for parent company but outsources non core work to offshore provider is known as:
Shared Captive
Hybrid Captive
Divest Captive
none of the above

One of the three important roles IS plays in management control processes is:
control
evaluation
service
automation