---
title: 13-6-2023
sidebar_position: 3
---

A general manager should:
Rely on IS personnel to make IS decisions
Ignore how IS are used and managed
Have a deep technical knowledge of IS 
Understand the use and consequences of technologies relevant to the business

Two automobile manufacturers are working together to develop hybrid technology. This type of relationship between the two automobile manufacturers is best described as:
Co-opetition
Strategic alliance
Competition
Collaboration

In which type of organizational structure is power centralized and the type of environment best supported stable and certain?
Flat
Networked 
Hierarchical 
Matrix

Which collaboration technology is becoming more and more popular both inside and outside organizations, consuming much of our attention on a day-to-day basis?
Intranet
Wikis
VoIP
Social networking on mobile devices

Enterprise systems are useful for organizations seeking to do all of the following except:
Encourage duplication of data
Centralize decision making
Make effective use of organizational databases
Unify operations

A manager must know enough about the IT architecture and IT infrastructure so that he or she can:
Select the correct wireless provider.
Make realistic use of IT and know what to expect from IT.
Choose the appropriate IT infrastructure components.
Limit future business options.

How long do you think it usually takes for someone to discover a security compromise in a system after the evidence shows up?
Several seconds
Several minutes
Several hours
Several months

Spoofing is:
When someone makes fun of you for falling for a phishing scam
When the “from” address says the name/email address of a person different from who really sent it
When hackers snoop around in a system
When a person from IT unlocks your email account

A plan designed to counter a manmade or natural disaster that could cripple an enterprise is:
Business Continuity Plan
Disaster Recovery Plan
Business Disaster Plan
Disaster Business Case

The responsibility of the IT organization is to:
Manage core business functions like selling, accounting and manufacturing.
Partner with business managers to ensure the right IS exists to support the business strategy.
Set the business strategy.
Have sole responsibility for building information systems for the organization.

To justify an IT investment and receive necessary support and approval, a manager must often create a(n) ________________.
IT portfolio
community plan
business case
workflow diagram

This type of organization management is where IT controls most of its IT infrastructure in one location. 
Distributed IS organization
Decentralized IS organization
Joint-Control IS organization
Centralized IS organization


The IT Governance Council reports directly to the board of directors or the ________. 
CIO
CTO
CEO
COO

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 was primarily aimed at which functional unit of a corporation?
Marketing
Production
Sales
Finance

This is a balanced approach (hybrid of centralized and decentralized structures) to managing a company’s IT organization.
Centralization
Decentralization
Federalism
Joint-Control
Business Centricity

Kellwood, the American apparel maker, decided to consolidate and bring IT operations back in-house in order to reduce costs. Kellwood chose which of the following strategies?  
Outsource
Backsource
Offshore
Captive center

The initial reason organizations outsourced IT was which one of the following? 
Downsizing
Innovation
Cost reduction
Standardization

Outsourcing to a company located in the same time zone is referred to as this type of sourcing. 
Farshoring
Nearshoring
Zoneshoring
Insourcing

The purchase of a good or service that was previously provided internally, or that could be provided internally, is called: 
Outsourcing
Insourcing
Inshoring
Offshoring

Of the following list, the newest sourcing option for today’s IT organizations is:
Outsourcing
Insourcing
Farshoring
Cloud computing

Organizations may be afraid away from cloud computing because _________. 
it does not support multiple time zones.
It costs more money than offshoring.
of increased data security and privacy concerns.
SLAs cannot be established.

Today's managers must ensure that information about their employees and customers is only available to those who have a right to see it and use it, an issue referred to as: 
Screening
Accuracy
Accessibility
Perfection

This is the term used to describe ethical dilemmas that arise with the development and application of IT.
Stockholder theory
PAPA principles
Information ethics
Normative theories

All of the following are examples of green computing EXCEPT: 
Virtualization
Cloud computing
Tidal powered servers
Cookies


Section-B:  (Q.No. 7  to  15)
Each question carries 4 mark

What is the concept behind designing enterprise systems? List a few which are most frequently discussed.
Comprehensive, enterprise software packages.
Most frequently discussed:
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning), 
CRM (Customer Relationship Management), 
SCM (Supply Chain Management)
Designed to manage potentially hundreds of systems throughout a large organization.

Give at least three important properties of Enterprise Systems (Enterprise Resource Planning or ERP)
Seamlessly integrate information flows throughout the company.
Reflect industry “best” practices.
Need to be integrated with existing hardware, OSs, databases, and telecommunications.
Some assembly (customization) is required
The systems evolve to fit the needs of the diverse marketplace.

What is the difference between ‘attaining’ and ‘sustaining’ competitive advantage?
Attaining competitive advantage is one thing
A firm often exploits rare and valuable resources
But sustaining competitive advantage is another 
Resources must be difficult to transfer or relatively immobile

What are the economics of outsourcing?
Benefits:
Sell equipment, buildings (large cash inflow)
Downsized payroll – outsourcer hires employees
Costs:
Services provided for a fee
Fixed costs usually over 10-year term