---
sidebar_position: 0
---

# CPIS-486 E-commerce strategies

Adpater

Shaper

Customer relationship business

Product innovation and commercialization business

Infrastructure management business

Virtual organization and integrated companies

Sustaining innovations

Disruptive innovations

Low-end disruption

New-market disruption

Top-down disruption

#### E-business model

A business model needs to address:
- The revenue and product aspects,
- The business actor and network aspects,
- The marketing aspects of a business."

Revenue models

1. Commission - fees levied on transactions based on the size of the transaction.
2. Advertising - revenue generated by charging for advertising rather than by charging the end users for using the website.
3. Mark-up - the primary source of revenue from mark-up on the products it sells via the Internet.
4. Production - which Rappa called the manufacturing model, where the manufacturer sells to the customers directly via the Internet.
5. Referral-based - firms rely on fees for steering visitors to another company's site.
6. Subscription-based - the company charges users a flat rate on a periodic basis for certain services.
7. Fee-for-service based - activities are metered and the users pay for what they consume, which Rappa calls the utility model.

Hagel's web strategy emphasizes leveraging web services to drive profits and growth in the knowledge-based, network economy by accelerating capability building, tapping into network effects, shifting from products to services, embracing disruptive innovation, and cultivating specialized capabilities. This has led to the deconstruction of traditional vertically integrated value chains, replaced by flexible coordination mechanisms and new business models.

Virtual organizations, while offering access to global talent, flexibility, cost savings, and knowledge transfer, face challenges such as lack of camaraderie, communication issues, delegation problems, work ethic differences, and personal connection barriers. Navigating these qualities and difficulties is crucial for virtual organizations to succeed, requiring effective leadership, clear communication, structured workflows, and fostering team camaraderie.

