Marketing: An Introduction, 13e (Armstrong)



Chapter 6 Customer-Driven Marketing Strategy: Creating Value for Target Customers



1) _____ is the process of dividing a market into distinct groups of buyers who have different needs, characteristics, or behavior.

A) Differentiation

B) Mass marketing

C) Market targeting

D) Market segmentation

E) Positioning



2) Harry's caters to the clothing needs of men, manufacturing two different lines of fashion based on the purchasing power of its customers. One product line caters to the needs of affluent, middle-aged men, and the other line targets younger, up-and-coming professionals. Harry's most likely segments the consumer market based on variables.

A) geographic

B) psychographic

C) universal

D) demographic

E) behavioral



3) consists of arranging for a market offering to occupy a clear, distinctive, and desirable place relative to competing products in the minds of target consumers.

A) Differentiation

B) Positioning

C) Market targeting

D) Market segmentation

E) Mass marketing



4) Which of the following is the right order of the steps that companies generally follow in designing a customer-driven marketing strategy?

A) market segmentation, differentiation, positioning, and market targeting

B) positioning, market segmentation, mass marketing, and market targeting

C) market segmentation, market targeting, differentiation, and positioning

D) market alignment, market segmentation, differentiation, and market positioning

E) market recognition, market preference, market targeting, and market insistence



5) Companies today are moving away from target marketing and toward mass marketing.



6) While designing a customer-driven marketing strategy, marketers are likely to divide the market into smaller segments.



7) Lilly's, a furniture retailer, sells low-end furniture and accent pieces that are targeted toward lower-income consumer groups. Lilly's most likely segments the consumer market based on ________ variables.

A) demographic

B) psychographic

C) universal

D) geographic

E) behavioral



8) Gulf Coast, a wholesale shrimp distributor, groups its customers by regions in the United States, such as Midwest, Northeast, and Southwest. For each region, Gulf Coast tailors a different set of advertisements and promotions. The supplier is segmenting its market according to .

A) behavioral factors

B) personality characteristics

C) geographic location

D) benefits sought

E) demographics



9) Pedi certain Pet Supplies, a pet-food company, divides the pet market according to the pet owners' gender, occupation, income, and family life cycle. In this case, which of the following variables has the company used for market segmentation?

A) geographic

B) psychographic

C) benefit

D) demographic

E) occasion



10) One reason demographic variables are the most popular bases for segmenting customer groups is because they .

F) create smaller segments

G) create more easily accessible segments

H) do not involve stereotypes

I) are easier to measure than other variables

J) involve fewer attributes to consider



11) Delta, an American video game manufacturer, targets teens between the ages of 13 and 18, providing free game trials and applications. The firm's marketing approach exemplifies _____ segmentation.

A) age and life-cycle

B) geographic

C) occasion

D) gender

E) income



11) segmentation factors divide buyers into different groups based on social class, lifestyle, or personality characteristics.

A) Geographic

B) Demographic

C) Psychographic

D) Behavioral

E) User status



12) P&G was among the first to use segmentation when it introduced Secret, a deodorant brand specially formulated for women's chemistry.

A) age and life-cycle

B) gender

C) behavior

D) psychographic

E) geographic



12) Which type of market segmentation is generally used by marketers who sell luxury products targeted to the affluent segments of a population?

F) usage rate

G) occasion

H) income

I) benefits sought

J) gender



13) Bass Pro Shops recognizes that outdoors enthusiasts are a diverse group. Likely segments include hunters, campers, and boaters. What is this segmentation method called?

A) user status

B) usage rate

C) benefit

D) behavioral

E) psychographic



14) Dividing buyers into groups based on their knowledge, attitudes, uses, or responses to a product is called segmentation.

A) behavioral

B) psychographic

C) age and life-cycle

D) user status

E) geographic



15) Bakeries and coffee bistros that offer pumpkin-flavored items only during the autumn season target their consumers primarily through segmentation.

A) psychographic

B) demographic

C) income

D) occasion

E) age and life-cycle



16) The marketing manager at Frizzles' Eateries targets customers who are working to lose weight but who still want to dine out. The restaurant chain offers a wide variety of low-fat, lowcalorie meals that appeal to dieters. Frizzles' approach is best referred to as segmentation.

A) age and life-cycle

B) user status

C) benefit

D) demographic

E) geographic



17) Markets can be segmented into groups of nonusers, ex-users, potential users, first-time users, and regular users of a product. This method of segmentation is called .

A) user status segmentation

B) usage rate segmentation

C) benefit segmentation

D) behavioral segmentation

E) loyalty status segmentation



18) Shampoo marketers segment buyers as light, medium, or heavy product users. This is an example of segmentation.

A) user status

B) usage rate

C) benefits sought

D) occasion

E) psychographic



19) Gold Class Electricals, a consumer-electronics firm, targets market segments based on factors such as country, age, social class, usage rate, and benefits sought. The company divides its markets based on .

A) demographic variables

B) geographic regions

C) multiple segmentation bases

D) behavioral variables

E) psychographic segmentation bases



20) Danko International is a multinational company that targets the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) because they're fast-growing developing economies and use to segment its world markets.

A) political factors

B) legal factors

C) personality factors

D) economic factors

E) cultural factors



21) Producers of popular beverages often partner with global music channels to target consumers through a variety of promotional events and advertisements. This approach to marketing is referred to as segmentation.

A) intermarket

B) income

C) age and life-cycle

D) occasions

E) gender



22) Market segments that can be effectively reached and served are said to be .

A) measurable

B) accessible

C) substantial

D) actionable

E) profitable



23) When the size, purchasing power, and profiles of a market segment can be determined, the market segment is said to be .

A) measurable

B) accessible

C) substantial

D) actionable

E) observable



24) When a market segment is large or profitable enough to serve, it is termed .

A) measurable

B) accessible

C) substantial

D) actionable

E) differentiable



25) When an effective program can be designed for attracting and serving a chosen segment, the segment is best described as .

A) accessible

B) measurable

C) reachable

D) actionable

E) differentiable



26) If men and women respond dissimilarly to the marketing efforts for a root beer-flavored malt beverage, they are considered market segments.

A) accessible

B) measurable

C) reachable

D) differentiable

E) observable



27) Target and Kohl's have opened smaller-format stores designed to fit the needs of densely packed urban neighborhoods. This is an example of geographic segmentation.



28) Marketers must be careful to guard against stereotypes when using age and life-cycle segmentation.



29) Demographic factors are the most popular bases for segmenting customer groups.



30) Demographic variables are generally more difficult to measure than most other types of variables.



31) Not all companies that use income segmentation target the affluent.



32) Cupcake Gourmet, a high-end bakery in Manhattan, segments its customers according to those who frequent their store regularly, those who visit infrequently, and those who have never visited. This is an example of usage-rate segmentation.



33) Marketers typically limit their market segmentation analysis to a single variable in order to simplify the process.



34) Multivariable segmentation systems merge and analyze geographic, demographic, lifestyle, and behavioral data to help companies segment their markets.



35) Business and consumer marketers use many of the same variables to segment their markets.



36) Light users are often a small percentage of a company's market but account for a high percentage of total consumption.



37) New communications technologies like satellite TV and social media are likely to eliminate the need for markets to be geographically segmented as clusters of countries.



38) For market segments to be beneficial for companies, they must be measurable.



39) How do businesses segment their markets?



Business buyers are segmented by the variables of operating characteristics, purchasing approaches, situational factors, and personal characteristics. Like consumers, business buyers can be segmented using geographic, demographic, benefits sought, user status, usage rate, and loyalty status segmentation to create customer segments.



40) Briefly describe the characteristics of effective market segments.



Answer: To be useful, market segments must be:

Measurable: The size, purchasing power, and profiles of the segments can be measured.

Accessible: The market segments can be effectively reached and served.

Substantial: The market segments are large or profitable enough to serve. It should be the largest possible homogeneous group worth pursuing with a tailored marketing program.

Differentiable: The segments are conceptually distinguishable and respond differently to different marketing mix elements and programs.

Actionable: Effective programs can be designed for attracting and serving consumers who make up the segment.



41) A market segment is less attractive when .

A) there are few aggressive competitors in the segment

B) it is difficult for new entrants to enter the segment

C) it contains powerful suppliers who can control prices

D) substitute products are unavailable in the segment

E) buyers in the market segment have weak bargaining powers



42) Which of the following is an approach where firms target a whole market based on common consumer needs?

A) demographic segmentation

B) undifferentiated marketing

C) micromarketing

D) concentrated marketing

E) geographic segmentation



43) Marketing the same product to a huge customer base without any customization is referred to

as .

A) mass marketing

B) differentiated marketing

C) niche marketing

D) local marketing

E) individual marketing



44) Port Orleans Shipping markets different services to the tourism, defense, and trade segments. The firm designs separate offers for each segment based on their needs. This approach is called ____ marketing.

A) concentrated

B) differentiated

C) individual

D) mass

E) local



45) Although not recommended, some marketers decide to ignore market segmentation and target the whole market with one offer. This is known as marketing.

A) undifferentiated

B) differentiated

C) niche

D) local

E) individual



46) The marketing manager of Refresh Inc., a leading producer of soft drinks, is considering a differentiated marketing strategy. An important consideration is weighing increased sales against before selecting this strategy.

A) decreased production

B) increased demand

C) increased costs

D) decreased prices

E) increased profits



47) Compared with undifferentiated marketing, differentiated marketing is more likely to lead to .

A) reduced sales in each market segment

B) weaker product position in each market segment

C) higher costs of doing business

D) redundancy in product design across market segments

E) smaller market share in the industry



48) A successful niche marketing strategy relies on a firm's .

A) availability of services

B) product positioning

C) superior products

D) knowledge of customer needs

E) affordable pricing



49) Unlike other car rental agencies that are based in airports to serve travelers, Rental Wheelz has a network of neighborhood offices. The firm strives to serve people who need car rentals for reasons other than vacation, such as when their own cars are being repaired. Rental Wheelz caters to a small share of the large car rental market. From this description, it can be concluded that Rental Wheelz most likely practices .

F) undifferentiated marketing

G) multi-segmented marketing

H) individual marketing

I) local marketing

J) concentrated marketing



49) The practice of tailoring products and marketing programs to suit the tastes of specific individuals and locations is referred to as .

A) niche marketing

B) micromarketing

C) segmented marketing

D) global marketing

E) undifferentiated marketing



50) marketing tailors brands and promotions to the needs and wants of specific cities, neighborhoods, and even stores.

A) Differentiated

B) Mass

C) Niche

D) Local

E) Individual



51) Which of the following is true about local marketing?

A) It does not cater to individual stores.

B) It does not support evolving technologies.

C) It increases manufacturing costs.

D) It increases economies of scale.

E) It reduces logistical issues.



52) At the extreme, micromarketing becomes in so far as products and marketing programs are tailored to the needs and preferences of customers.

A) differentiated marketing

B) multi-segmented marketing

C) local marketing

D) mass marketing

E) individual marketing



53) When a company interacts one-on-one with large numbers of customers to create customer unique value by designing products and services tailor-made to individual needs, it is engaging

in .

A) concentrated marketing

B) mass marketing

C) mass customization

D) differentiated marketing

E) local marketing



54) Smaller companies may lack the skills and resources needed to serve larger segments.



55) A segment is more attractive if it is easy for new competitors to enter the market.



56) A market segment with powerful suppliers controlling the prices is more attractive than a segment with less powerful suppliers.



57) Even if a segment has the right size and growth and is structurally attractive, a company must consider its own objectives and resources before targeting that segment.



58) Using a differentiated marketing strategy, a company is likely to design a product and a marketing program that will appeal to the largest number of buyers.



59) The low cost of setting up shop on the Internet makes it even more profitable to serve seemingly small niches.



60) Niche marketing offers smaller companies an opportunity to compete by focusing their limited resources on serving niches that may be unimportant to or overlooked by larger companies.



61) The full positioning of a brand is called the unique selling proposition.



62) Which of the following is true of product positioning?

A) A product's position is defined by the number of competitors in a market.

B) Product positioning has little influence on the design of marketing mixes.

C) Consumers generally reevaluate products every time they make a buying decision.

D) To simplify the buying process, consumers are likely to position products in their minds.

E) Consumers cannot position products with or without the help of marketers.



72) Discuss how companies differentiate and position their products for maximum Bose promises "better sound through research." This is an example of .

F) people differentiation

G) channel differentiation

H) price differentiation

I) services differentiation

J) product differentiation

Answer: J



73)Companies are likely to gain through speedy, convenient, or careful delivery of

products.

K) price differentiation

L) product differentiation

M)channel differentiation

N) services differentiation

O) people differentiation

Answer: N



63) Which of the following types of differentiation is used to gain competitive advantage through the way a firm designs its distribution coverage, expertise, and performance?

A) services differentiation

B) channel differentiation

C) people differentiation

D) product differentiation

E) price differentiation



64) Argonaut Food Stores, a retail giant, hires better-skilled employees than its competitors by employing strategic recruitment practices. It also conducts highly specialized training programs for its employees. In this case, Argonaut has focused on gaining a strong competitive advantage through differentiation.

A) image

B) people

C) services

D) product

E) channel



65) The distinctive yellow and blue "hands held high" logo of a local daycare distinguishes it from other establishments. The logo is prominently displayed on its building, t-shirts worn by the children, and at fundraising events. The daycare has differentiated itself through .

A) image

B) people

C) services

D) channels

E) positioning




66) When firms use symbols, colors, or characters to convey their personalities, they are using

 differentiation.

A) image

B) people

C) usage-rate

D) user-status

E) channel



67) Which of the following is true of perceptual positioning maps?

A) They are used by marketers to divide a market into smaller groups with distinct characteristics.

B) They are used by marketers to identify supplier and retailer perceptions of a product.

C) They are used to analyze consumer perceptions of a brand relative to competing products.

D) They are used to divide buyers into groups based on their perceived income and age.

E) They are used to plot the geographic segments that a company needs to target.



68) Eastline, a manufacturer of outdoor patio furniture, positions its products as superior in weatherproofing and durability. This is an example of differentiation.

A) product

B) services

C) image

D) people

E) channels



69) A brand difference is said to be preemptive if .

A) competitors cannot easily copy the difference

B) buyers can afford to pay for the difference

C) the difference can be introduced profitably

D) the difference is communicable

E) the difference is beneficial to customers



70) Rad, a manufacturer of luxury watches, charges a higher price for its products than its competitors. Despite the high prices, the brand is popular among customers for its quality and service in comparison to cheaper alternatives available in the market. In this case, Rad offers a(n) ______ value proposition.

A) more-for-more

B) more-for-the-same

C) more-for-less

D) all-or-nothing

E) same-for-less



71) Using a positioning strategy, companies can attack the more-for-more strategy of another firm by offering a brand of comparable quality at a lower price.

A) more-for-the-same

B) more-for-less

C) same-for-less

D) less-for-much-less

E) less-for-more



72) Which positioning strategy offers value for consumers by providing the same brands as competitors at a lower price?

A) more-for-the-same

B) more-for-less

C) same-for-less

D) less-for-much-less

E) more-for-more



73) The full positioning of a brand is referred to as the .

A) differentiated strategy

B) concentrated strategy

C) unique selling proposition

D) value proposition

E) undifferentiated strategy



74) Stores offering low-quality alternatives to luxury products at low prices most likely follow a ______ positioning strategy.

A) more-for-the-same

B) more-for-less

C) same-for-less

D) less-for-much-less

E) more-for-more



75) Which of the following strategies is most likely to be followed by firms that position themselves as caterers of the best products at economical prices?

A) more-for-the-same

B) more-for-less

C) same-for-less

D) more-for-more

E) less-for-much-less



76) Household Storez, a local retail store, claims to offer better products at lower prices than other retail stores. In this case, the firm's positioning reflects a value proposition.

A) more-for-the same

B) more-for-less

C) same-for-less

D) more-for-more

E) same-for-more



77) Which of the following includes the target segment of a product, the category to which the product belongs, and the product's point of difference from other members in the category?

A) mission statement

B) vision statement

C) profit statement

D) positioning statement

E) inventory statement



78) Zeal is a popular automobile brand, and its positioning statement is: "For upscale American families who require large vehicles, Zeal is the automobile of choice." Which of the following mandatory elements is missing from the positioning statement?

A) point of difference

B) target audience

C) brand name

D) product category

E) need



79) Company and brand positioning should be summed up in a .

A) mission statement

B) vision statement

C) profit statement

D) positioning statement

E) corporate statement



80) A company or brand image should convey a product's distinctive benefits and positioning.

