---
title: Chapter 5 Understanding Consumer and Business Buyer Behavior
sidebar_position: 4
---

Stimulus-Response Model: a psychological framework that initially focused on predicting advertising effects based solely on the characteristics of the stimulus and the response of the target group.

Selective perception is the tendency not to notice and more quickly forget stimuli that cause emotional discomfort and contradict prior beliefs.

Selective attention is the act of focusing on a particular object for some time while simultaneously ignoring distractions and irrelevant information.

Selective perception is the unconscious process by which people screen, select, and notice objects in their environment, information tends to be selectively perceived in ways that align with existing attitudes, beliefs, and goals.

Selective distortion occurs when people subconsciously try to make new information fit their old ideas about something.

Selective retention is the inclination for people to be more likely to remember information that closely aligns with their needs, beliefs, interests, and values.

adopter groups: innovators, early adopters, the early majority, the late majority and laggards.

Innovators are eager to try new ideas, to the point where their venturesomeness almost becomes an obsession. Innovators’ interest in new ideas leads them out of a local circle of peers and into social relationships more cosmopolite than normal.  Usually, innovators have substantial financial resources, and the ability to understand and apply complex technical knowledge.  While others may consider the innovator to be rash or daring, it is the hazardous risk-taking that is of salient value to this type of individual.  The innovator is also willing to accept the occasional setback when new ideas prove unsuccessful (Rogers, 1971). 

Early adopters tend to be integrated into the local social system more than innovators.  The early adopters are considered to be localites, versus the cosmopolite innovators.  People in the early adopter category seem to have the greatest degree of opinion leadership in most social systems.  They provide advice and information sought by other adopters about an innovation.  Change agents will seek out early adopters to help speed the diffusion process.  The early adopter is usually respected by his or her peers and has a reputation for successful and discrete use of new ideas (Rogers, 1971).  

Members of the early majority category will adopt new ideas just before the average member of a social system.  They interact frequently with peers, but are not often found holding leadership positions.  As the link between very early adopters and people late to adopt, early majority adopters play an important part in the diffusion process.  Their innovation-decision time is relatively longer than innovators and early adopters, since they deliberate some time before completely adopting a new idea.  Seldom leading, early majority adopters willingly follow in adopting innovations (Rogers, 1971). 

The late majority are a skeptical group, adopting new ideas just after the average member of a social system.  Their adoption may be borne out of economic necessity and in response to increasing social pressure.  They are cautious about innovations, and are reluctant to adopt until most others in their social system do so first.  An innovation must definitely have the weight of system norms behind it to convince the late majority.  While they may be persuaded about the utility of an innovation, there must be strong pressure from peers to adopt (Rogers, 1971). 

Laggards are traditionalists and the last to adopt an innovation.  Possessing almost no opinion leadership, laggards are localite to the point of being isolates compared to the other adopter categories.  They are fixated on the past, and all decisions must be made in terms of previous  generations.  Individual laggards mainly interact with other traditionalists.  An innovation finally adopted by a laggard may already be rendered obsolete by more recent ideas already in use by innovators.   Laggards are likely to be suspicious not only of innovations, but of innovators and change agents as well (Rogers, 1971).  

---

Learning Objectives
+ Understand the consumer market and the major factors that influence consumer buyer behavior.
+ Identify and discuss the stages in the buyer decision process.
+ Describe the adoption and diffusion process for new products.
+ Define the business market and identify the major factors that influence business buyer behavior.
+ List and define the steps in the business buying decision process.

First Stop: Lenovo

Understanding Customers and Building Profitable Relationships

Lenovo listens and communicates constantly with their customers and takes their input into consideration, as when customers complained about the removal of the TrackPoint buttons from the ThinkPad.

Learning Objective 5-1

Understand the consumer market and the major factors that influence consumer buyer behavior.

Consumer Buyer Behavior and Consumer Markets
- Buying behavior of final consumers: Consumer buyer behavior
- All the individuals and households that buy or acquire goods and services for personal consumption: Consumer market

Figure 5.1 - Model of Buyer Behavior

Figure 5.2 - Factors Influencing Consumer Behavior

Cultural Factors

To improve perceptions among young Asian Americans, AT&T created a Web series called “Away We Happened.”

Social Factors

Personal Factors

KitchenAid sells an entire cooking and entertainment lifestyle to “Kitchenthusiasts.”

Psychological Factors

Figure 5.3 - Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs

Learning Objective 5-1 Summary
- Consumer market and consumer buyer behavior
- Model of buyer behavior
- The environment, buyer’s black box, and buyer responses
- Factors influencing consumer behavior:
  - Cultural
  - Social
  - Personal characteristics
  - Psychological factors

Learning Objective 5-2

Identify and discuss the stages in the buyer decision process.

Figure 5.4 - Buyer Decision Process

Postpurchase customer satisfaction is key to building profitable customer relationships.

Learning Objective 5-2 Summary
- Stages in the buyer decision process:
  - Need recognition
  - Information search
  - Alternative evaluation
  - Purchase decision
  - Postpurchase behavior

Learning Objective 5-3

Describe the adoption and diffusion process for new products.

Stages in the Adoption Process

Figure 5.5 - Adopter Categories Based on Relative Time of Adoption of Innovations

Characteristics Influencing an Innovation’s Rate of Adoption

Learning Objective 5-3 Summary
- Five stages of the adoption process:
  - Awareness
  - Interest
  - Evaluation
  - Trial
  - Adoption
- The diffusion process for new products:
  - Innovators, early adopters, early mainstream, late mainstream, or lagging adopters

Learning Objective 5-4

Define the business market and identify the major factors that influence business buyer behavior.

Business Buyer Behavior
- Business buyer behavior involves purchasing goods and services used in the production of other products and services.
- Business-to-business (B-to-B) marketers must understand business markets and business buyer behavior.
- Business buying process: Determining which products and services to purchase; finding, evaluating, and choosing among alternative suppliers and brands.

Business Markets
- Business markets are huge and involve more money and items than consumer markets.
- They differ from consumer markets in terms of:
  - Market structure and demand
  - Nature of the buying unit
  - Types of decisions and the decision process

Market Structure and Demand
- Business market structure and demand:
  - Fewer but larger buyers.
  - Derived demand: Business demand that comes from the demand for consumer goods.
  - Inelastic and fluctuating demand.

Nature of the Buying Unit
- Nature of the business market buying unit
  - More decision participants
  - More professional purchasing effort

Types of Decisions
- Business purchases
  - More complex buying decisions
  - Large sums of money
  - Complex technical and economic considerations
  - Interactions among people at many levels of the buyer’s organization

Decision Process
- Buying processes
  - Longer and more formalized procedures
  - Buyer and seller more dependent on each other
  - Supplier development: Systematic development of networks of supplier-partners to ensure a dependable supply of products and materials

Figure 5.6 - A Model of Business Buying Behavior

Types of Buying Situations
- Solutions selling: IBM works with Six Flags to provide a complete solution.

Participants in the Business Buying Process
- Buying center: All the individuals and units that play a role in the purchase decision-making process:
  - Actual users of the product or service
  - People who make the buying decision
  - People and units influencing the buying decision
  - People who do the actual buying
  - Individuals and units controlling the buying information

Figure 5.7 - Major Influences on Business Buying Behavior

Learning Objective 5-4 Summary
- Buying behavior of organizations
- Business-to-business (B-to-B) marketers
- Business buying process
- Market structure and demand
- Types of buying situations
- Buying center - decision-making unit

Learning Objective 5-5

List and define the steps in the business buying decision process.

Figure 5.8 - Stages of Business Buying Behavior

E-Procurement and Online Purchasing
- Purchasing through electronic connections between buyers and sellers—usually online.
- E-procurement occurs through:
  - Reverse auctions
  - Online trading exchanges
  - Company buying sites
  - Extranet links with key suppliers

Benefits and Problems of E-Procurement

Business-to-Business Digital and Social Media Marketing
- B-to-B marketers are now using a wide range of digital and social media marketing approaches.
- Compared with traditional media and sales approaches, digital and social media can create greater customer engagement and interaction.

Learning Objective 5-5 Summary
- Steps in the business buying decision process:
  - Problem recognition, general need description, product specifications, proposal solicitation, supplier selection, order-routine specification, and performance review.
- Information and digital technology have given birth to “e-procurement.”