---
title: Chapter 6 Customer-Driven Marketing Strategy
sidebar_position: 5
---

Behavioral segmentation is the process of sorting and grouping customers based on the behaviors they exhibit: the types of products and content they consume, and the cadence of their interactions with an app, website, or business.

Psychographic segmentation is a market research method used to divide a market or customer group into segments based on their beliefs, values, lifestyle, social status, activities, interests and opinions and other psychological criteria.

Benefit segmentation is dividing market based on the perceived value, benefit, or advantage consumers perceive that they receive from a product or service.

Intermarket segmentation refers to forming segments of consumers who have similar needs and buying behaviour, even though they are located in different countries.

Demographic segmentation divides the market into smaller categories based on demographic factors such as age, gender, and income.

Usage rate segmentation is used to divide customers into groups according to how much they use the product.

Micromarketing is an approach to advertising that tends to target a specific group of people in a niche market.

differentiated marketing

services differentiation

More for more, the same for more or less for more

---

Learning Objectives
+ Define the major steps in designing a customer value-driven marketing strategy: market segmentation, targeting, differentiation, and positioning.
+ List and discuss the major bases for segmenting consumer and business markets.
+ Explain how companies identify attractive market segments and choose a market targeting strategy.
+ Discuss how companies differentiate and position their products for maximum competitive advantage.

First Step: Henkel’s Persil

A “Global” Marketing Success

Persil’s success in the Middle East is predominantly due to a deep understanding of the regional consumers’ needs and preferences.

Learning Objective 6-1

Define the major steps in designing a customer value-driven marketing strategy: market segmentation, targeting, differentiation, and positioning.

Figure 6.1 - Designing a Customer Value-Driven Market Strategy

Learning Objective 6-1 Summary
- Customer value-driven marketing strategy
- Identifying which customers to serve
- Determining a value proposition
- Market segmentation and market targeting
- Differentiating the market offering
- Positioning in the minds of target customers
- Right relationships with the right customers

Learning Objective 6-2

List and discuss the major bases for segmenting consumer and business markets.

Table 6.1 - Major Segmentation Variables for Consumer Markets

Geographic and Demographic Segmentation
- Geographic segmentation: Dividing a market into different geographical units such as nations, states, regions, countries, cities, or neighborhoods.
- Demographic segmentation: Dividing a market into segments based on variables such as age, life-cycle stage, gender, income, occupation, education, religion, ethnicity, and generation.

Psychographic Segmentation
- Marketers segment their markets using variables such as:
  - Social class
  - Lifestyle
  - Personality characteristics
- The products people buy reflect their lifestyles.

VF Corporation offers a closet full of more than 30 premium lifestyle brands.

Behavioral Segmentation
- Occasion segmentation: Segments divided according to occasions when buyers get the idea to buy, make their purchase, or use the purchased item.
- Benefit segmentation: Segments divided according to the different benefits that consumers seek from the product.

Schwinn makes bikes for every benefit segment.

Behavioral Segmentation
- User status: Markets can be segmented into non-users, ex-users, potential users, first-time users, and regular users.
- Usage rate: Markets can be segmented into light, medium, and heavy product users.
- Loyalty status: Consumers can be loyal to brands, stores, and companies.

Multiple Segmentation Bases
- Segmentation bases help companies to:
  - Identify smaller, better-defined target groups.
  - Identify and understand key customer segments.
  - Reach customers more efficiently by tailoring market offerings and messages to customers’ specific needs.
  - Segmentation systems help marketers segment people and locations into marketable groups of like-minded consumers.

Segmenting Business Markets
- Consumer and business markets use many of the same variables for segmentation.
- Variables used by business marketers for segmentation include:
  - Operating characteristics
  - Purchasing approaches
  - Situational factors
  - Personal characteristics

Segmenting International Markets
- Variables include:
  - Geographic location
  - Economic factors
  - Political and legal factors
  - Cultural factors
  - Intermarket (cross-market) segmentation: Grouping consumers with similar needs and buying behaviors irrespective of their location.

Requirements for Effective Segmentation

Learning Objective 6-2 Summary
- Consumer market segmentation:
  - Geographic, demographic, psychographic, and behavioral.
  
- Business market segmentation:
  - Demographics, operating characteristics, purchasing approaches, situational factors, and personal characteristics.
  
- Requirements for effective segmentation:
  - Measurable, accessible, substantial, differentiable, and actionable.

Learning Objective 6-3

Explain how companies identify attractive market segments and choose a market targeting strategy.

Market Targeting
- Evaluating the various segments based on:
  - Segment size and growth
  - Segment structural attractiveness
  - Company objectives and resources
- Selecting target market segments:
  - Target market: Set of buyers sharing common needs or characteristics that the company decides to serve.

Figure 6.2 - Market-Targeting Strategies

Choosing a Targeting Strategy
- Factors to consider:
  - Company resources
  - Product variability
  - Product’s life-cycle stage
  - Market variability
  - Competitors’ marketing strategies

Socially Responsible Target Marketing
- Controversy and concern of target marketing:
  - Vulnerable or disadvantaged consumers are targeted with controversial or potentially harmful products.
- Socially responsible target marketing should serve both the interests of the company and the interests of these targeted consumers.

Learning Objective 6-3 Summary
- Four market-targeting strategies:
  - Undifferentiated (or mass), differentiated, concentrated (or niche), and micromarketing.
  - Micromarketing includes local and individual marketing.

Learning Objective 6-4

Discuss how companies differentiate and position their products for maximum competitive advantage.

Differentiation and Positioning
- Firms must decide which segments to target and on the value proposition.
- Product position is the way a product is defined by consumers on important attributes.

Figure 6.3 - Positioning Map: Large Luxury SUVs

Choosing a Differentiation and Positioning Strategy

Identifying Possible Value Differences and Competitive Advantages:
- Competitive advantage: An advantage over competitors gained by offering greater customer value either by:
  - Having lower prices, or
  - Providing more benefits that justify higher prices.
  
Firms can differentiate in terms of product, services, channels, people, or image.

Figure 6.4 - Possible Value Proposition

Winning Value Proposition

| Value Proposition | Description |
|----------------|---------------|
| More for more                 | Provides the best upscale product or service |
| More for the same            | Higher quality at lower prices |
| More for less                 | Best winning proposition |
| The same for less             | Gives a great deal |
| Less for much less            | Meeting consumers’ lower performance or quality requirements at a lower price |

Developing a Positioning Statement

Positioning statement: Summarizes company or brand positioning.

Format: To (target segment and need) our (brand) is (concept) that (point of difference).

Example Positioning Statement:
“To busy multitaskers who need help remembering things, Evernote is a digital content management application that makes it easy to capture and remember moments and ideas from your everyday life using your computer, phone, tablet, and the Web.”

Communicating and Delivering the Chosen Position
- All the company’s marketing activities must support the positioning strategy.
- Maintain the position through consistent performance and communication.
- The product’s position should be monitored and adapted over time.

Learning Objective 6-4 Summary
- Differentiation and positioning has three steps:
  - Identifying differentiations to create competitive advantage.
  - Choosing advantages to build a position.
  - Selecting an overall positioning strategy.
  
A brand’s full positioning is its value proposition.