---
title: Chapter 8
sidebar_position: 8
---

target market, planned value proposition, and sales goals 

planned price, distribution, and marketing budget 

sales, market share, and profit goals

Product development is usually followed by test marketing. 

Once the decision was made to launch the new taco shell, product development 

product development, products undergo rigorous tests

If a product passes both the concept test and the product test, test marketing

final prototype, test marketing

a software that generates store-by-store, week-by-week reports on the actual sales of tested products and the impact of in-store and in-home marketing efforts, controlled test markets

It is generally difficult to forecast the sales level at each PLC stage.

modify the marketing mix, use aggressive sales promotions

maturity, profits level off or decline

5) The Dairy Bar, a national soft-service ice cream retailer, buys cones from Cones & More. Cones & More is an important resource for marketplace information. They're considered a(n) source of new product ideas for the Dairy Bar. 
A) entrepreneurial 
B) competitive 
C) external 
D) internal 
E) intrapreuneurial

10) Safari Unlimited recently conducted national research to generate ideas for a new line of fatigues geared to women. The company uncovered a number of ideas about clothing and accessory preferences as well as important benefits such as built-in sunblock and durability. The Safari Unlimited product development team will most likely use next to arrive at a realistic number of products for the new fatigues line. 
A) crowdsourcing 
B) idea screening 
C) concept testing 
D) concept development 
E) business analysis 
Answer: B 
 
11)  Which of the following steps of the new product development process would most likely use an R-W-W framework? 
A) idea generation 
B) idea screening 
C) concept testing 
D) test marketing 
E) commercialization 
Answer: B 
 
12)   A detailed version of a product idea stated in meaningful consumer terms is a .
A) product feature 
B) product concept 
C) product idea 
D) product image 
E) product framework 
Answer: B 

15) Doggie World concept tested an idea for a new chew toy that would entertain dogs while simultaneously cleaning their teeth. Dog owners were pleased with the results. The next stage in developing the new product concept is . 
A) idea screening 
B) marketing strategy development 
C) business analysis 
D) product development 
E) test marketing 
Answer: B

18) The third part of a marketing strategy statement describes the of a new product.
A) sales, market share, and profit goals 
B) distribution and pricing 
C) marketing budget 
D) planned value proposition 
E) target market and sales goals 
Answer: A 

19) involves a review of the sales, costs, and profit projections for a new product to determine whether they satisfy a company's objectives. 
A) Vendor analysis 
B) Portfolio analysis 
C) Business analysis 
D) SWOT analysis 
E) Concept analysis 
Answer: C

22) Taco Bell test marketed Doritos Locos Tacos for three years and developed 45 prototypes. Once the decision was made to launch the new taco shell, it moved into the stage of the new product development process. 
A) concept development 
B) product development 
C) test marketing 
D) strategy development 
E) commercialization 
Answer: B 
 
23) In the stage of new product development, products undergo rigorous tests to make sure that they perform safely and effectively, or that consumers will find value in them.
A) business analysis 
B) idea generation 
C) concept screening 
D) product development 
E) test marketing 
Answer: D 

24) If a product passes both the concept test and the product test, the next step is most likely to be . 
A) marketing strategy development 
B) product development 
C) test marketing 
D) business analysis 
E) concept development 
Answer: C 
 
LO: 8-2: List and define the steps in the new product development process and the major considerations in managing this process.

25) Foods International is developing a new gluten-free, chili-flavored pretzel. The marketing strategy for the product has already been developed and presented to top management. Several prototypes were also formulated by the company's R&D team. The final prototype is now being tested rigorously to ensure that it passes FDA standards. Once approved, the next step will most likely be . 
A) test marketing 
B) portfolio analysis 
C) commercialization 
D) internal marketing 
E) business analysis 
Answer: A

27) Evans and Hills, a beverages manufacturing company, has developed a new line of specialty teas and is seeking regular input from the test marketing process. To facilitate this process, the firm uses BuyerScan, a software that generates store-by-store, week-by-week reports on the actual sales of tested products and the impact of in-store and in-home marketing efforts. Which of the following approaches does this scenario illustrate? 
A) standard test markets 
B) inventory tracking 
C) controlled test markets 
D) simulated test markets 
E) direct commercialization 
Answer: C

29) Using _____, researchers measure consumer responses to new products and marketing tactics in laboratory stores or virtual online shopping environments. 
A) simulated test markets 
B) controlled test markets 
C) business analysis 
D) standard test markets 
E) concept development 
Answer: A 
 
LO: 8-2: List and define the steps in the new product development process and the major considerations in managing this process. 

30) Introducing a new product into the market is called _____. 
A) test marketing 
B) segmentation 
C) product development 
D) commercialization 
E) market penetration 
Answer: D 

31) Which of the following costs is most likely associated with commercialization?
A) building or renting a manufacturing facility 
B) paying groups of consumers for participating in crowdsourcing activities
C) determining a product's planned price, distribution, and marketing budget
D) developing a prototype of a product 
E) using simulated tests to measure market capacity 
Answer: A

41) Since suppliers are so close to the market, they are valuable sources of information about consumer problems, marketing opportunities, and new product possibilities.
Answer: FALSE

45) Concept testing typically follows the marketing strategy development phase of the new product development process. 
Answer: FALSE

55) It's important for a market pioneer to choose a launch strategy that is consistent with competitive positioning strategies. 
Answer: FALSE

57) can describe a product class, a product form, or a brand. 
A) The product development process 
B) The product life cycle concept 
C) Business analysis theory 
D) Vendor analysis theory 
E) Portfolio analysis 
Answer: B

60) Which of the following is true of the product life cycle (PLC)? 
A) All products generally go through all five stages of the PLC. 
B) All products pass through the stages of PLC in the same order. 
C) It is generally difficult to forecast the sales level at each PLC stage. 
D) The PLC concept can be applied to styles but not to fashions and fads.
E) Product forms have longer life cycles than product classes. 
Answer: C

65) When a product is in the stage, profits level off or decline because of increased marketing outlays to defend the product against competition. 
A) production 
B) decline 
C) maturity 
D) test marketing 
E) conception 
Answer: C

68) In the stage, a firm most likely faces a trade-off between high market share and high current profit. 
A) growth 
B) decline 
C) maturity 
D) introduction 
E) commercialization 
Answer: A