---
title: Chapter 9
sidebar_position: 9
---

value-added Providing extra amenities to differentiate and support high-priced products

Cost-based pricing involves setting prices based on the expenses involved in producing, distributing, and selling a product plus a fair rate of return for a company's effort and risk.

cost-plus. The total cost to produce each unit is $3.50. The company has decided to add a $1.50 markup, so the unit price to distributors will be $5

pure competition, uniform commodity

cannot charge more than the going market price per unit without the risk of losing business to the other farmers, pure competition


Customer value-based pricing  
good-value
Cost-based
cost-plus
fails to consider customer value
cost-based
target costing
monopolistic

5) ________ uses buyers' perceptions of what a product is worth as the key to pricing. 
A) Customer value-based pricing  
B) Target return pricing  
C) Cost-plus pricing  
D) Psychological pricing  
E) Competition-based pricing  
Answer: A  

8) Retailers like Walmart and Target carry less-expensive versions of established brand name products or new lower-price lines. They have adopted a ________ pricing strategy. 
A) high-low  
B) target return  
C) cost-plus  
D) good-value  
E) market-skimming  
Answer: D  

10) ________ pricing involves setting prices based on the expenses involved in producing, distributing, and selling a product plus a fair rate of return for a company's effort and risk. 
A) Competition-based  
B) Value-added  
C) Cost-based  
D) Good-value  
E) Demand-based  
Answer: C  

14) Lovely Skin is establishing a pricing strategy for a new moisturizer. The total cost to produce each unit is $3.50. The company has decided to add a $1.50 markup, so the unit price to distributors will be $5. Lovely Skin is using a ________ approach to price the new moisturizer. 
A) value-added 
B) good-value 
C) cost-plus 
D) competitor-based 
E) break-even 
Answer: C 

17) Which of the following statements about break-even analysis is most likely true? 
A) It determines how customer-perceived value changes with value-added pricing. 
B) It is a tool used to calculate fixed costs. 
C) It is used to determine the maximum price that can be set on a product. 
D) It is a tool marketers use to examine the relationship between supply and demand. 
E) It fails to consider customer value and the relationship between price and demand
Answer: E 

19) Everyday low pricing is a cost-based pricing strategy. 
Answer: FALSE 

23) Target return pricing is a variation of break-even pricing. 
Answer: TRUE

27) Each PC produced by HP involves a cost of computer chips, wires, plastic, packaging, and  other inputs. Although these costs tend to be the same for each unit produced, they are called  ________ costs because the total changes based on the number of units produced. 
A) fixed  
B) variable  
C) target  
D) capital  
E) payroll  
Answer: A 

29) Radox, a luxury watch brand, identifies a market segment that is willing to pay premium  prices for its watches, and Radox managers select an ideal selling price. Managers then  determine the costs to create watches that meet the ideal selling price. The company's pricing  approach is referred to as ________.  
A) mass production  
B) cost-plus pricing  
C) target costing  
D) value-added pricing  
E) target return pricing  
Answer: C

32) Under ________, the market consists of many buyers and sellers trading over a range of  prices rather than a single market price.  
A) pure competition  
B) monopolistic competition  
C) oligopolistic competition  
D) a pure monopoly  
E) a pure monopsony  
Answer: B 

37) Target costing starts with an ideal selling price based on customer value considerations and  then aims at costs that will ensure that the price is met.  
Answer: TRUE

40) The demand curve shows the number of units the market will buy in a given time period at  similar prices.  
Answer: FALSE

53) Posh Collections introduced a new watch to appeal to upscale consumers. The company will  most likely use a(n) ________ strategy.  
A) market-skimming pricing  
B) market-penetration pricing  
C) optional-product pricing  
D) by-product pricing  
E) allowance pricing  
Answer: A

78) ________ prices are carried in buyers' minds and used when looking at a given product. 
A) Captive-product  
B) Reference  
C) Promotional  
D) Geographical  
E) Dynamic  
Answer: B