---
title: Marketing Channels:Delivering Customer Value  
sidebar_position: 10
---

contractual marketing

administered marketing

horizontal conflict

vertical conflict

administered vertical

wholesale

retail

full line forcing

exclusive dealing

selective distribution

1)  Which of the following is true of a conventional distribution channel?
A) It has each channel member acting as a separate business unit trying to maximize its own profits.  
B) It consists of producers selling their products directly to customers without the use of intermediaries.  
C) It has one channel member owning the other channel members.  
D) It is a distribution channel where a producer is owner of all the other channel members.
E) It has all members of the channel working together as a single organization

1)  A ________ consists of producers, wholesalers, and retailers acting as a unified system. The system can be dominated by any one of the interdependent members.  
A) direct marketing system  
B) horizontal distribution channel  
C) lateral marketing system  
D) conventional distribution channel  
E) vertical marketing system  

1)  Integrating the entire distribution chain — from its own design and manufacturing operations to distribution through its own managed stores — has turned Spanish clothing chain Zara into the world's fastest-growing fast-fashion retailer. This is an example of a(n) ________ marketing system.  
A) contractual vertical  
B) corporate vertical  
C) administered vertical  
D) horizontal  
E) direct  
Answer: B 

1)  Which type of channel arrangement is a retailer like Home Depot likely to follow? 
A) administered vertical marketing system  
B) horizontal marketing system  
C) contractual vertical marketing system  
D) corporate vertical marketing system  
E) direct marketing system  
Answer: A  

1)  Rage, a leading motor vehicle manufacturer, introduces a new superbike model. It invites proposals from independent dealers who are willing to set up exclusive showrooms that only sell rage's superbikes. Chosen dealers will sell and service the superbikes, and Rage will oversee national advertising. This is most likely an example of a(n) ________.  
A) administered vertical marketing system  
B) horizontal manufacturing marketing system  
C) manufacturer-sponsored retailer franchise system  
D) manufacturer-sponsored wholesaler franchise system  
E) direct marketing system  

1)  Sonic Shack, an audio equipment retailer, signs an agreement with PineWire, a renowned electronics company, to sell PineWire products. The deal requires Sonic Shack to provide pineWire products with superior displays, shelf space, and promotion compared to competing products. Sonic agrees to these terms as PineWire products command a huge share in the market. which of the following types of channel arrangements do PineWire and Sonic Shack most likely have?  
A) administered vertical marketing system  
B) corporate vertical marketing system  
C) indirect marketing system  
D) wholesaler franchise system  
E) horizontal marketing system  
Answer: A  

1)  Brandy's, a national candy store chain, decides to open both a coffee house and ice cream shop within their stores to create a multi-faceted experience for shoppers. The company decides to enter into deals with two well-known retailers — The Beanery and Creamy Creations. As stipulated in their respective contracts, The Beanery and Creamy Creations cannot enter into the same type of agreement with any other candy retailers. All three companies will enjoy greater sales, and ultimately profits, from the arrangement. This is most likely an example of a(n)  ________ marketing system.  
A) direct  
B) administered vertical  
C) corporate vertical  
D) contractual vertical  
E) horizontal  
Answer: E  

1)  Victoria's Closet, a manufacturer of bohemian-style clothing and accessories, sells its products through its online Web site, a catalogue, and specialty boutiques that target women. which kind of channel arrangement does Victoria's Closet employ to distribute its products? 
A) horizontal marketing system  
B) multichannel distribution system  
C) administered vertical marketing system  
D) contractual vertical marketing system  
E) corporate vertical marketing system  
Answer: B  

1)  An administered vertical marketing system integrates successive stages of production and distribution under single ownership.  
Answer: FALSE 

1)  In an administered VMS, the producer assumes the leadership position in a distribution channel by default.  
Answer: FALSE  

1)  Many athletic stadiums enter into contractual agreements with national beverage companies and food franchises to distribute only their brand-name products at the respective venues. This is an example of ________.  
A) horizontal price fixing  
B) disintermediation  
C) exclusive dealing  
D) selective distribution  
E) horizontal integration  
Answer: C  