---
title: Marketing Channels:Delivering Customer Value  
sidebar_position: 11
---

Push strategy: promotes its product to intermediaries, encouraging them to push the product to consumers.

Pull strategy: promotes its product directly to consumers, creating demand that pulls the product through the distribution channel.

Persuasive advertising: persuade consumers to purchase a product or service by highlighting its benefits and advantages.

Reminder advertising: remind consumers of a product or brand, especially for established products.

Informative advertising: provides information about a product or service, often used for new products or complex products.

Madison & Vine: intersection of advertising and entertainment, often involving product placement and branded content.

Product placement advertising: strategically placed in movies, TV shows, or other media to gain exposure.

Slice of life advertising: depicts everyday situations and how a product can improve those situations.

micromarketing

Advertisers are using highly targeted media to reach smaller customer segments with personalized, interactive messages

Less advertising money is spent on digital media than on TV advertising

Advertisement only provides one-way communication with customers

personal selling and direct marketing both are involved in personal interactions with customers

based on an amount remaining after operating expenses and capital outlays are deducted from total revenues

competitive-parity method