---
title: Chapter 5 IT and Business Transformation
sidebar_position: 5
---

Sloan Valve
+ What was wrong with their Product Development Process?
+ What did Sloan do? What is NPD?
+ Did it help?
+ Are all enterprise system implementations this successful?
  

SILO PERSPECTIVE VERSUS BUSINESS PROCESS PERSPECTIVE


Silo (Functional) Perspective
+ Specialized functions (sales, accounting, production, etc.)
+ Advantages:
+ Allows optimization of expertise.
+ Group like functions together for transfer of knowledge.
+ Disadvantages:
+ Sub-optimization (reinvent wheel; gaps in communication; 
bureaucracy)
+ Tend to lose sight of overall organizational objectives.Executive Offices 
CEO
President
Operations Marketing Accounting Finance Administration
  

The Process Perspective
+ Examples of processes:
+ Fulfill customer orders
+ Manufacturing, planning, execution
+ Procurement (see below)
+ Processes have:
+ Beginning and an end
+ Inputs and outputs
+ A process to convert inputs into outputs
+ Metrics to measure effectiveness
+ They cross functionsReceive 
Requirement for 
Goods/ServicesCreate and Send 
Purchase OrderReceive Goods Verify Invoice Pay Vendor
  

Cross -Functional Nature of Business Processes
  

How to Manage a Process
+ Identify the customers of processes (who receives 
the output?)
+ Identify the customers’ requirements (how do we 
judge success?)
+ Clarify the value each process adds to the 
organizational goals
+ Share this perspective so the organization itself 
becomes more process focused
  

Comparison of Silo Perspective and 
Business Process Perspective
Silo Perspective Business Process 
Perspective
Definition Self-contained functional units 
such as marketing, operations, 
financeInterrelated, sequential set of 
activities and tasks that turns 
inputs into outputs
Focus Functional Cross -functional
Goal 
AccomplishmentOptimizes on functional goals, 
which might be suboptimal for 
the organizationOptimizes on organizational 
goals, or the “big picture”
Benefits Highlighting and developing 
core competencies; functional 
efficienciesAvoiding work duplication and 
cross -functional communication 
gaps; organizational 
effectiveness
Problems Redundancy of information 
throughout the organization; 
cross -functional inefficiencies; 
communication problemsDifficult to find knowledgeable 
generalists; sophisticated 
software is needed

What do you do when things change?
+ Dynamic and agile processes
+ Examples:
+ Agile: Autos are built with wires and space for 
options
+ Dynamic: Call centers route incoming or even 
outgoing calls to available locations and agents
+ Software defined architectures (see chapter )
+ IT is required to pull this off well
  

Techniques to Transform a Static 
Process
+ Radical process redesign 
+ Also known as business process reengineering
+ Incremental, continuous process 
improvement
+ Including total quality management (TQM) and 
Six Sigma
  

Incremental Change
+ Total Quality Management
+ Often results in favorable reactions from personnel
+ Improvements are owned and controlled
+ Less threatening change
+ Six-Sigma is one popular approach to TQM
+ Developed at Motorola
+ Institutionalized at GE for “near -perfect products”
+ Generally regarded as . defects per million opportunities for 
defect ( stddev from mean)
TimeImprove -
ment
  

Radical Change
+ Business Process Reengineering (BPR)
+ Sets aggressive improvement goals.
+ Goal is to make a rapid, breakthrough impact on key 
metrics in a short amount of time.
+ Greater resistance by personnel.
+ Use only when radical change is needed.
TimeImprove -
ment
  

Comparing the Two
Improve -
ment
  

Key Aspects of Radical Change 
Approaches
+ Need for quick, major change
+ Thinking from a cross -functional process 
perspective
+ Challenge to old assumptions
+ Networked (cross -functional organization)
+ Empowerment of individuals in the process
+ Measurement of success via metrics tied to 
business goals and effectiveness of new processes
  

Workflow and Mapping Processes
+ Workflow diagrams show a picture of the sequence 
and detail of each process step
+ Objective is to understand and communicate the 
dimensions of the process
+ Over  products are available to do this
+ High -level overview chart plus detailed flow 
diagram of the process
  

BPM
+ Information systems tools used to enable information 
flow within and between processes.
+ Comprehensive, enterprise software packages.
+ Most frequently discussed:
+ ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning ), 
+ CRM (Customer Relationship Management), 
+ SCM (Supply Chain Management)
+ Designed to manage the potentially hundreds of 
systems throughout a large organization.
+ SAP , Oracle, Peoplesoft are the most widely used ERP 
software packages in large organizations.
  

BPM Architecture
  

Standardization vs Integration
Business Process Standardization
Low HighBusiness Process 
IntegrationHigh Single face to customers 
and suppliers but standards 
not enforced internallyHigh needs for reliability, 
predictability, and sharing; 
single view of process
Low Decentralized design; 
business units decide how 
to meet customer needsTasks are done the same way 
across units, but there is little 
need for business units to 
interact
Source: J. Ross “ Forget Strategy: Focus IT on your Operating Model,” 
MIT Center for Information Systems Research Briefing (December )
  

Enterprise Systems (Enterprise Resource 
Planning or ERP)
+ Seamlessly integrate information flows throughout the 
company.
+ Reflect industry “best” practices.
+ Need to be integrated with existing hardware, OSs, 
databases, and telecommunications .
+ Some assembly (customization) is required
+ The systems evolve to fit the needs of the diverse 
marketplace.
  

ERP Advantages and Disadvantages
Advantages Disadvantages
+ Represent “best practices”
+ Modules throughout the 
organization communicate with 
each other
+ Enable centralized decision -making
+ Eliminate redundant data entry
+ Enable standardized procedures in 
different locations+ Enormous amount of work
+ Require redesign of business 
practices for maximum benefit
+ Require customization if special 
features are needed
+ Very high cost
+ Sold as a suite, not individual 
modules
+ Requires extensive training
+ High risk of failure
  

ERP II
+ Makes information available to external 
stakeholders too
+ Enables e -business applications
+ Integrates into the cloud
+ Includes ERP plus other functions (see Figure .)
  

ERP and ERP II Functions
  

Customer Relationship 
Management
+ Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is a 
natural extension of applying the value chain model 
to customers.
+ CRM includes many management activities 
performed to 
+ obtain, 
+ enhance relationships with, and 
+ retain customers.
+ CRM can lead to better customer service, which 
leads to competitive advantage for the business.
  

CRM
+ Common systems are:
+ Oracle
+ SAP
+ Salesforce.com (web -based cloud system)
+ Oracle and SAP integrate into their ERP 
systems
  

Supply Chain Management (SCM)
+ An enterprise system that manages the integrated 
supply chain
+ Translation: processes are linked across companies
+ The single network optimizes costs and 
opportunities for all companies in the supply chain
+ Every part of the supply chain has the latest 
information about sales expected and inventories 
from source materials at all stages
+ Bullwhip effect occurs when the supplier at each 
stage adds a small “buffer” for it’s suppliers in case 
demand is higher than expected
  

Difficulties in Integrated Supply Chains
+ Information integration requires agreement of what 
information to share, how to share it, and the 
authority to view it.
+ Trust must be established
+ Planning must be synchronized carefully
+ Workflow must be coordinated between partners to 
determine what to do with the information they 
obtain
  

Advantages and Disadvantages 
of Enterprise Systems
  

The Adoption Decision
+ The enterprise system sometimes should drive 
business process redesign when:
+ Just starting out.
+ Organizational processes are not relied upon for strategic 
advantage.
+ Current systems are in crisis.
+ It is inappropriate for the enterprise system to drive 
business process redesign when:
+ Changing an organization’s processes that are relied upon for 
strategic advantage.
+ The package does not fit the organization.
+ There is a lack of top management support.
  

Managing and Using Information Systems: 
A Strategic Approach – Sixth Edition
Keri Pearlson, Carol Saunders, 
and Dennis Galletta

