---
title: Module 5 Network Protocols
sidebar_position: 2
---

Simply having a connection between end devices is not enough to enable communication. For communication to occur, devices must know “how” to communicate. 

Communication is governed by rules called protocols. 

These protocols are specific to the type of communication method occurring.

Network protocols specify many features of network communication.

Network protocols provide the means for computers to communicate on networks.

Network protocols dictate the message encoding, formatting, encapsulation, size, timing, and delivery options.

Networking protocols define a common format and set of rules for exchanging messages between devices.
Some common networking protocols are Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and Internet Protocol (IP). 

## Communications Protocols Unicast, Multicast, and Broadcast

A message can be delivered in different ways. Hosts on a network various delivery options to communicate. The different methods of communication are called as unicast, multicast, and broadcast.

Unicast: A one-to-one delivery option means there is only a single destination for the message. 

Multicast: When a host needs to send messages using a one-to many delivery option.

Broadcast: If all hosts on the network need to receive the message at the same time, a broadcast may be used. Broadcasting represents a one-to-all message delivery option.


## Communications Protocols
The Benefits of Using a Layered Model

A layered model is used to modularize the operations of a network into manageable layers. These are the benefits of using a layered model:

Assisting in protocol design

Fostering competition 

Preventing technology or capability changes 

Providing a common language

Two layered models that are used to describe network operations are:

Open System Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model

TCP/IP Reference Model

## The OSI Reference Model

The OSI reference model provides list of functions and services that can occur at each layer. 

This type of model provides consistency within all types of network protocols and services by describing what must be done at a particular layer, but not prescribing how it should be accomplished.

It also describes the interaction of each layer with the layers directly above and below.

Note that while the TCP/IP model layers are referred only by name but the seven OSI model layers are more often referred by number rather than by name. 

## The TCP/IP Protocol Model

The TCP/IP protocol model is also referred to as the internet model.

It describes the functions that occur at each layer of protocols within the TCP/IP suite. TCP/IP is also used as a reference model. 

## Data EncapsulationEncapsulation & De-encapsulation Example

When messages are being sent on a network, the encapsulation process works from top to bottom.

At each layer, the upper layer information is considered data within the encapsulated protocol. For example, the TCP segment is considered data within the IP packet.

This process is reversed at the receiving host and is known as de-encapsulation.