---
title: Module 17:Attacking What We Do
sidebar_position: 7
---

Module Objectives

Module Title: Attacking What We Do

Module Objective: Explain how common network applications and services are vulnerable to attack.

Topic Title Topic Objective

Enterprise Services Explain how network application vulnerabilities enable network attacks

## 17.1 Enterprise Services

### HTTP and HTTPS
- To investigate web-based attacks, security analysts must have a good understanding of how a standard web-based attack works.

Common stages of a typical web attack:
- The victim unknowingly visits a web page that has been compromised by malware.
- The compromised web page redirects the user to a site containing malicious code.
- The user visits this site with malicious code and their computer becomes infected.
- After identifying a vulnerable software package running on the victim’s computer, the exploit kit contacts the exploit kit server to download the malicious code.
- After the victim’s computer has been compromised, it connects to the malware server and downloads a payload.
- The final malware package is run on the victim’s computer.

- Server connection logs can often reveal information about the type of scan or attack.
- The different types of connection status codes are:
- Informational 1xx
- Successful 2xx
- Redirection 3xx
- Client Error 4xx
- To defend against web-based attacks:
- Always update the OS and browsers with current patches and updates.
- Use a web proxy to block malicious sites.
- Use the best security practices from the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) when developing web applications.
- Educate end users by showing them how to avoid web-based attacks.

### Common HTTP Exploits

Malicious iFrames
- An iFrame is an HTML element that allows the browser to load another web page from another source.
- In iFrame attacks, the threat actors insert advertisements from other sources into the page.
- Threat actors compromise a webserver and modify web pages by adding HTML for the malicious iFrame.
- As the iFrame is running in the page, it can be used to deliver a malicious exploit. such as spam advertising, exploit kits, and other malware.

Steps to prevent or reduce malicious iFrames:
- Use a web proxy like to block malicious sites.
- Ensure web developers do not use iFrames.
- Use a service such as Cisco Umbrella to prevent users from navigating to malicious websites.
- Ensure the end user understands what an Iframe is.

HTTP 302 Cushioning

- Threat actors use the 302 Found HTTP response status code to direct the user’s web browser to a new location.
- The browser believes that the new location is the URL provided in the header. The browser is invited to request this new URL. This redirect function can be used multiple times until the browser finally lands on the page that contains the exploit. 

Steps to prevent or reduce HTTP 302 cushioning attacks:
- Use a web proxy to block malicious sites.
- Use a service such as Cisco Umbrella to prevent users from navigating to malicious websites.
- Ensure the end user understands how the browser is redirected through a series of HTTP 302 redirections.

Domain Shadowing
- When a threat actor create a domain shadowing attack, first they compromise a domain. Then they must create multiple subdomains of that domain to be used for the attacks using Hijacked domain registration logins.
- After these subdomains have been created, attackers can use them even if they are found out to be malicious domains. They can simply make more from the parent domain. Steps to prevent or reduce Domain shadowing attacks:
- Secure all domain owner accounts.
- Use a web proxy to block malicious sites.
- Use a service such as Cisco Umbrella to prevent users from navigating to web sites that are known to be malicious.
- Make sure that domain owners validate their registration accounts and look for any subdomains that they have not authorized.

### Email
- As the level of use of email rises, security becomes a greater priority.
- The way users access email today also increases the opportunity for the threat of malware to be introduced.

Examples of email threats:
- Attachment-based attacks - Threat actors embed malicious content in business files such as an email from the IT department.
- Email spoofing - Threat actors create email messages with a forged sender address that is meant to fool the recipient into providing money or sensitive information.
- Spam email - Threat actors send unsolicited email containing advertisements or malicious files.
- Open mail relay server - This is an SMTP server that allows anybody on the internet to send mail.

### Web-Exposed Databases
- Web applications commonly connect to a relational database to access data.
- As relational databases often contain sensitive data, databases are a frequent target for attacks.

Code Injection

- The attacker’s commands are executed through the web application and has the same permissions as the web application.
- This type of attack is used because often there is insufficient validation of input. SQL Injection
- Threat actors use SQL injections to breach the relational database, create malicious SQL queries, and obtain sensitive data from the relational database.
- A successful SQL injection exploit can read sensitive data from the database, modify database data, execute administration operations on the database, and sometimes, issue commands to the operating system.

### Client-side Scripting

- Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) is where web pages that are executed on the client-side, within their own web browser, are injected with malicious scripts.
- These scripts can be used by Visual Basic, JavaScript, and others to access a computer, collect sensitive information, or deploy more attacks and spread malware.
- The two main types of XSS are Stored (persistent) and Reflected (non-persistent).
- Ways to prevent or reduce XSS attacks:
- Ensure that web application developers are aware of XSS vulnerabilities and how to avoid them.
- Use an IPS implementation to detect and prevent malicious scripts.
- Use a web proxy to block malicious sites.
- Use a service such as Cisco Umbrella to prevent users from navigating to malicious websites.

## Summary

Attacking What We Do Summary

What Did I Learn in this Module?

- The compromised web page redirects the user to a site that hosts malicious code which is known as a drive-by download.

- Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks occur when browsers execute malicious scripts on the client and provide threat actors with access to sensitive information on the local host.

- The OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks is designed to help organizations create secure web applications.