---
title: Module 18:Understanding Defense
sidebar_position: 8
---

Module Objectives

Module Title: Understanding Defense

Module Objective: Explain approaches to network security defense.

Topic Title Topic Objective

Defense-in-Depth Explain how the defense-in-depth strategy is used to protect networks.

Security Policies, Regulations, and Standards Explain security policies, regulations, and standards.

## 18.1 Defense-in-Depth

## Understanding Defense

## The Security Onion and The Security Artichoke

There are two common analogies that are used to describe a defense-in-depth approach.

Security Onion
- A common analogy used to describe a defense-in-depth approach is called "the security onion."
- As illustrated in figure, a threat actor would have to peel away at a network’s defenses layer by layer in a manner similar to peeling an onion.
- Only after penetrating each layer would the threat actor reach the target data or system.

Note: The security onion described on this page is a way of visualizing defense-in-depth. This is not to be confused with the Security Onion suite of network security tools.

Security Artichoke

- The evolution of borderless networks has changed the analogy to the "security artichoke", which benefits the threat actor.
- As illustrated in the figure, threat actors no longer have to peel away each layer. They only need to remove certain "artichoke leaves."
- The bonus is that each "leaf" of the network may reveal sensitive data that is not well secured.
- In order to get at the heart of the artichoke, the hacker chips away at the security armor along the perimeter.
- While internet-facing systems are very well protected, persistent hackers do find a gap in that hard-core exterior through which they can enter.

## 18.2 Security Policies, Regulations, and Standards

### Business Policies

- Business policies are the guidelines that are developed by an organization to govern its actions.
- The policies define standards of correct behavior for the business and its employees.
- In networking, policies define the activities that are allowed on the network.
- This sets a baseline of acceptable use. If behavior that violates business policy is detected on the network, it is possible that a security breach has occurred.

An organization may have several guiding policies, as listed in the table.

Policy Description

Company policies
- It establishes the rules of conduct and the responsibilities of both employees and employers.
- It protect the rights of workers as well as the business interests of employers.
- Depending on the needs of the organization, various policies and procedures establish rules regarding employee conduct, attendance, dress code, privacy and other areas related to the terms and conditions of employment.

Employee policies
- These policies are created and maintained by human resources staff to identify employee salary, pay schedule, employee benefits, work schedule, vacations, and more.
- They are often provided to new employees to review and sign.

Security policies
- These policies identify a set of security objectives for a company, define the rules of behavior for users and administrators, and specify system requirements.
- These objectives, rules, and requirements collectively ensure the security of a network and the computer systems in an organization.
- It is a constantly evolving document based on changes in the threat landscape, vulnerabilities, and business and employee requirements.

### Security Policy

- Security policies are used to inform users, staff, and managers of an organization’s requirements for protecting technology and information assets.
- A comprehensive security policy has a number of benefits, including the following:
- Demonstrates an organization’s commitment to security
- Sets the rules for expected behavior
- Defines the legal consequences of violations
- A security policy also specifies the mechanisms that are needed to meet security requirements and provides a baseline from which to acquire, configure, and audit computer systems and networks for compliance.

Question: Find the KAU security policy from the website ?

The following table lists the policies that may be included in a security policy:

| Policy | Description |
|-|-|
| Identification and authentication policy | It specifies authorized persons that can have access to network resources and identity verification procedures. |
| Password policies | These ensure passwords meet minimum requirements and are changed regularly. |
| Acceptable use policy (AUP) | It identifies network applications and uses that are acceptable to the organization. It may also identify ramifications if this policy is violated. |
| Remote access policy | It identifies how remote users can access a network and what is accessible via remote connectivity. |
| Network maintenance policy | It specifies network device operating systems and end user application update procedures. |
| Incident handling procedures | These describe how security incidents are handled. |

### BYOD Policies

- Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) enables employees to use their own mobile devices to access company systems, software, networks, or information.
- It provides key benefits to enterprises, including increased productivity, reduced costs, better mobility for employees, and so on. These benefits also bring an increased security risk as

BYOD can lead to data breaches and greater liability for the organization.
- Therefore, a BYOD security policy should be developed to accomplish the following:
- Specify the goals of the BYOD program
- Identify which employees can bring their own devices
- Identify which devices will be supported
- Identify the level of access employees are granted when using personal devices
- Describe the rights to access and activities permitted to security personnel on the device
- Identify which regulations must be adhered to when using employee devices
- Identify safeguards to put in place if a device is compromised

The following table lists the BYOD security best practices to help mitigate BYOD vulnerabilities:

| Best Practice | Description |
|-|-|
| Password protect access | Use unique passwords for each device and account. |
| Manually control wireless connectivity | Turn off Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity when not in use. Connect only to trusted networks. |
| Keep updated | Always keep the device OS and other software updated. Updated software often contains security patches to mitigate against the latest threats or exploits. |
| Back up data | Enable backup of the device in case it is lost or stolen. |
| Enable "Find my Device" | Subscribe to a device locator service with remote wipe feature. |
| Provide antivirus software | Provide antivirus software for approved BYOD devices. |
| Use Mobile Device Management (MDM) software | MDM software enables IT teams to implement security settings and software configurations on all devices that connect to company networks. |

## 18.3 Understanding Defense

Summary

Understanding Defense Summary

What Did I Learn in this Module?
- Organizations must use a defense-in-depth approach to identify threats and secure vulnerable assets.
- Organizations must have a set of policies that define the activities that are allowed on the network.
- Business policies define standards of correct behavior for the business and its employees.
- Security policies are used to inform users, staff, and managers of an organization’s requirements for protecting technology and information assets.
- The purpose of a BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) policy is to enable employees to use their own mobile devices to access company systems, software, networks, or information.
- The compliance regulations that an organization is obligated to follow depend on the type of organization and the data that the organization handles.

Module 18

New Terms and Commands
- Security Onion
- Security Artichoke
- Defense-in-Depth
- Acceptable Use Policy (AUP)
- Mobile Device Management (MDM)
- BYOD