---
title: Module 19: Access Control
sidebar_position: 9
---

Module Objectives

Module Title: Access Control

Module Objective: Explain access control as a method of protecting a network.

Topic Title Topic Objective

Access Control Concepts Explain how access control protocols network data.

AAA Usage and Operation Explain how AAA is used to control network access.

## 19.1 Access Control Concepts

### Communications Security: CIA

Information security deals with protecting information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction.

CIA Triad

The CIA triad consists of three components of information security:
- Confidentiality - Only authorized individuals, entities, or processes can access sensitive information.
- Integrity - This refers to the protection of data from unauthorized alteration.
- Availability - Authorized users must have uninterrupted access to the network resources and data that they require.

### Zero Trust Security

- Zero trust is a comprehensive approach to securing all access across networks, applications, and environments.
- This approach helps secure access from users, end-user devices, APIs, IoT, microservices, containers, and more.
- The principle of a zero trust approach is "never trust always verify".
- A zero trust security framework helps to prevent unauthorized access, contain breaches, and reduce the risk of an attacker's lateral movement through a network.
- In a Zero trust approach, any place at which an access control decision is required should be considered a perimeter.

The three pillars of zero trust are workforce, workloads, and workplace.

- Zero Trust for the Workforce - This pillar consists of people who access work applications by using their personal or corporate-managed devices. It ensures only the right users and secure devices can access applications, regardless of location.
- Zero Trust for Workloads - This pillar is concerned with applications that are running in the cloud, in data centers, and other virtualized environments that interact with one another. It focuses on secure access when an API, a microservice, or a container is accessing a database within an application.
- Zero Trust for the Workplace - This pillar focuses on secure access for all devices, including on the internet of things (IoT), that connect to enterprise networks, such as user endpoints, physical and virtual servers, printers, cameras and more.

### Access Control Models

- An organization must implement proper access controls to protect its network resources, information system resources, and information.
- A security analyst should understand the different basic access control models to have a better understanding of how attackers can break the access controls.
- The following table lists various types of access control models:

Discretionary access control (DAC)
- This is the least restrictive model and allows users to control access to their data as owners of that data.
- It may use ACLs or other methods to specify which users or groups of users have access to the information.

Mandatory access control (MAC) - This applies the strictest access control and is used in military or mission critical applications.

- It assigns security level labels to information and enables users with access based on their security level clearance.

Role-based access control (RBAC)
- Access decisions are based on an individual’s roles and responsibilities within the organization.
- Different roles are assigned security privileges, and individuals are assigned to the RBAC profile for the role.
- Also known as a type of non-discretionary access control.

Attribute-based access control (ABAC)

It allows access based on attributes of the object to be accessed, the subject accessing the resource, and environmental factors regarding how the object is to be accessed.

Rule-based access control (RBAC)
- Network security staff specify sets of rules or conditions that are associated with access to data or systems.
- These rules may specify permitted or denied IP addresses, or certain protocols and other conditions.
- Also known as Rule Based RBAC.

Time-based access control (TAC) It allows access to network resources based on time and day.

## 19.2 AAA Usage and Operation

### AAA Operation

- A network must be designed to control who is allowed to connect to it and what they are allowed to do when they are connected. These design requirements are identified in the network security policy.
- The policy specifies how network administrators, corporate users, remote users, business partners, and clients access network resources.
- The network security policy can also mandate the implementation of an accounting system that tracks who logged in and when and what they did while logged in.
- The Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) protocol provides the necessary framework to enable scalable access security.

The following table lists the three independent security functions provided by the AAA architectural framework:

AAA Component Description

Authentication
- Authentication can be established using username and password combinations, challenge and response questions, token cards, and other methods.
- AAA authentication provides a centralized way to control access to the network.

Authorization
- After the user is authenticated, authorization services determine which resources the user can access and which operations the user is allowed to perform.
- An example is "User can access host server XYZ using SSH only."

Accounting - Accounting records what the user does, including what is accessed, the amount of time the resource is accessed, and any changes that were made.
- Accounting keeps track of how network resources are used.
- An example is "User accessed host server XYZ using SSH for 15 minutes."

This concept is similar to the use of a credit card, as indicated by the figure. The credit card identifies who can use it, how much that user can spend, and keeps account of what items the user spent money on.

### AAA Authentication

- AAA Authentication can be used to authenticate users for administrative access or it can be used to authenticate users for remote network access.
- Cisco provides two common methods for implementing AAA Services:

Local AAA Authentication
- This method is known as self-contained authentication because it authenticates users against locally stored usernames and passwords.
- Local AAA is ideal for small networks.
- The client establishes a connection with the router.
- The AAA router prompts the user for a username and password.
- The router authenticated the username and password using the local database and the user is provided access to the network based on information in the local database.

Server-based AAA Authentication

- This method authenticates against a central AAA server that contains the usernames and passwords for all users. This is ideal for medium-to-large networks.
- The client establishes a connection with the router.
- The AAA router prompts the user for a username and password.
- The router authenticates the username and password using a AAA server.
- The user is provided access to the network based on information in the remote AAA server.

Centralized AAA

- Centralized AAA is more scalable and manageable than local AAA authentication, and therefore, it is the preferred AAA implementation.
- A centralized AAA system may independently maintain databases for authentication, authorization, and accounting.
- It can leverage Active Directory or Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) for user authentication and group membership, while maintaining its own authorization and accounting databases.
- Devices communicate with the centralized AAA server using either the Remote

Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) or Terminal Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS+) protocols.

## 19.3 Access Control Summary

What Did I Learn in this Module?

- The CIA triad consists of the primary three components of information security: confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
- Zero trust is a comprehensive approach to securing all access across networks, applications, and environments.
- The principle of zero trust is "never trust, always verify". The pillars of trust are zero trust for workforce, zero trust for workloads, and zero trust for workplace.
- A network must be designed to control who is allowed to connect to it and what they are allowed to do when they are connected which is specified in the network security policy.
- Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) systems provide the necessary framework to enable scalable security.
- Cisco provides two common methods of implementing AAA services: Local AAA Authentication and Server-based AAA Authentication.