The following content is found on pages of ScienceDirect generated by AI. ScienceDirect created topic-by-topic pages using heuristic and machine-learning approaches to extract relevant information from our extensive collection of content.

Integrity and Authenticity

Hash Function
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/hash-function

What is a hash function?

A hash function is a computational method that maps an indeterminate size of data into a fixed size of data. (David O. Manz et al., 2017) It provides a number quantity that represents the input data. (David O. Manz et al., 2017) A cryptographic hash function is a one-way function that takes as its input a message of any size and then returns a fixed-length string, named hash value. (Mehrdad Nojoumian et al., 2020) Once computed, it is computationally infeasible to invert the hash value and get the original message. (Mehrdad Nojoumian et al., 2020) Common hash functions are MD-5 and the SHA family such as SHA-1, SHA-2 and SHA-3. (David O. Manz et al., 2017) Hashing is used in blockchain for tamper-proof storage, block mining, and digital signature on transactions. (Choong Seon Hong et al., 2021) 

What is the purpose of computing hashes?

The purpose of computing hashes is to ensure data integrity, provide a unique identifier for data, and to securely store data. (Leighton Johnson, 2020) Hashing is also used in digital forensics to verify the authenticity of files and to detect any changes made to them. (Steven Bolt et al., 2013) Cryptographic hashing algorithms are used to scramble data and produce a fixed length product, called the hash value. (Derrick Rountree, 2011) Hashing relies on the fact that hashes are one-way, meaning that you can use the hash and the data to create the hash value, but you cannot figure out the data given the hash value. (Derrick Rountree, 2011) Hash functions should also avoid collisions, where two different sets of data produce the same hash value. (Derrick Rountree, 2011) Finally, hashing is used to create checksums or message digests to ensure data has not been altered. (Leighton Johnson, 2020) 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781597496537000050
Jason Andress, in The Basics of Information Security, 2011
Hash functions represent a third cryptography type alongside symmetric and asymmetric cryptography, what we might call keyless cryptography. Hash functions, also referred to as message digests, do not use a key, but instead create a largely unique and fixed-length hash value, commonly referred to as a hash, based on the original message, something along the same lines as a fingerprint.
Hashes cannot be used to discover the contents of the original message, or any of its other characteristics, but can be used to determine whether the message has changed. In this way, hashes provide confidentiality, but not integrity. Hashes are very useful when distributing files or sending communications, as the hash can be sent with the message so that the receiver can verify its integrity. The receiver simply hashes the message again using the same algorithm, then compares the two hashes. If the hashes match, the message has not changed. If they do not match, the message has been altered.
Although it is theoretically possible to engineer a matching hash for two different sets of data, called a collision, this is a very difficult task indeed, and generally requires that the hashing algorithm be broken in order to accomplish. Some algorithms, such as Message-Digest algorithm 5 (MD5), have been attacked in this fashion, although producing a collision is still nontrivial. When such cases occur, the compromised algorithm usually falls out of common use. Hashing algorithms such as SHA-2 and the soon-to-arrive SHA-3 have replaced MD5 in cases where stringent hash security is required.
Many other hash algorithms exist and are used in a variety of situations, such as MD2, MD4, and RACE.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168169923008840
Potential of blockchain technology in wood supply chains
Lukas Stopfer, ... Thomas Purfürst, in Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2024
3.2 Hashing
As previous mentioned, the hash function is used to determine a value that connects the block chronologically with another block and cryptographically encrypts it (see Fig. 3) (Yang et al., 2020). Further, with hash functions, any input data of any size is mapped to a defined, significantly smaller data size. Representations of the words “harvest area 001″ and “harvest area 002” are shown in Table 1 under different hash standards SHA-1, SHA-256 and SHA-512. It is remarkable that by changing one digit in the original text, the whole hash value changes (Iftekhar and Cui, 2021).
The function calculates so-called brute forces an individual target value that does not allow any conclusions to be drawn about the input values. The SHA-256 hash algorithm often used here generates 2256 variants, a decimal number with 64 digits, which is considerably more variations than there are stars in the universe. A sender transmits a document and separately a hash value, so that the receiver can check the authenticity by using the function and to be sure the file is unchanged (Figs. 4 & 5) (Fill and Meier, 2020; Fill and Meier, 2020).
[Fig. 4. Hashing information between two successive stakeholders.][Fig. 5. Validating Hash value.]
-
-
What is the difference between symmetric and asymmetric encryption?
Symmetric encryption uses the same secret key for both encryption and decryption, while asymmetric encryption uses two different keys for encryption and decryption. The public key is used for encryption in asymmetric encryption, while the private key is used for decryption. Asymmetric encryption is slower than symmetric encryption, but it is stronger per bit of key length (Eric Conrad, 2011) . Symmetric encryption algorithms are generally faster than asymmetric encryption algorithms. Examples of symmetric encryption algorithms include AES, DES, and Blowfish, while examples of asymmetric encryption algorithms include RSA, DSA, and Elliptic Curve Cryptography.

Message Authentication Code
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/message-authentication-code

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221420962200095X
Towards secure intra-vehicle communications in 5G advanced and beyond: Vulnerabilities, attacks and countermeasures
Huimin Chen, ... Yijie Xun, in Vehicular Communications, 2023
5.1.2 Message authentication code
Message authentication code is a technology that provides data integrity and authenticates the identity of the sender. Through message authentication codes, the receiver can determine if the received packet has been tampered with or determine if someone is masquerading as the sender.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870512001606
Survey and comparison of message authentication solutions on wireless sensor networks
Marcos A. SimplicioJr, ... Mats Näslund, in Ad Hoc Networks, 2013
2.1 Message authentication codes
Message Authentication Codes (MACs) are similar to Hash-Functions, since they also are one-way functions used to create a fixed-length output from an arbitrary-length input message. The main difference between the two cryptographic solutions is that MACs also take as argument a secret key. For this reason, MAC algorithms are also referred to as “Keyed Hash-Functions” [37].
The utilization of MAC algorithms is as simple as follows. The message sender generates an authentication tag T=MACK(M) from message M using key K. Upon reception of M and T, the receiver uses the same key K to check whether this message plus tag pair is valid. If the verification is successful, the receiver accepts the message; otherwise, either M or T has been modified, or a user who does not know K has tried to send a (forged) message. In this manner, the presence of a secret key assures that only authorized users are able to create and verify authentication tags.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781597492836000039
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-59749-283-6.00003-9
An Introduction To Cryptography
In Next Generation SSH2 Implementation, 2009
Message Authentication Codes
A Message Authentication Code (MAC) is a tag attached to a message to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the message. It is derived by applying a MAC algorithm to a message in combination with a secret key.
MAC functions share similarities with cryptographic hash functions, however, they address different security requirements. The purpose of a MAC is to authenticate the source of a message and its integrity. Unlike a cryptographic hash, the MAC can be generated only by the intended recipient who has access to the secret key. Provided that the algorithm used to generate the MAC and the secret key are the same, a given message will always produce the same MAC.
The algorithm used to generate and verify the MAC is based on the DES.
A keyed Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) is an extension to the MAC function to include cryptographic hash function and a secret key in deriving the message authentication code. Typically, MD5 and SHA-1 cryptographic hash functions are used to calculate the HMAC value. The type of cryptographic hash used in creating the HMAC is appended to indicate the algorithm (e.g., HMAC-MD5 and HMAC-SHA1).

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128184271000112
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818427-1.00011-2
Security component fundamentals for assessment
Leighton Johnson, in Security Controls Evaluation, Testing, and Assessment Handbook (Second Edition), 2020
HMAC
Providing a way to check the integrity of information transmitted over or stored in an unreliable medium is a prime necessity in the world of open computing and communications. Mechanisms that provide such integrity checks based on a secret key are usually called message authentication codes (MACs). Typically, message authentication codes are used between two parties that share a secret key in order to authenticate information transmitted between these parties. This Standard defines MAC that uses a cryptographic hash function in conjunction with a secret key. This mechanism is called HMAC. HMAC shall use an Approved cryptographic hash function [FIPS 180-3]. HMAC uses the secret key for the calculation and verification of the MACs.
So, in review, the table below covers the three types of encryption and their particular uses.
Encryption provides confidentiality.
Hashing provides integrity (like a checksum).
Digital signatures provide authentication and integrity.
Digitally signed encryption provides confidentiality, authentication, and integrity.
[Table: comparing three types of encryption]

Mechanism
Data integrity
Confidentiality
Identification and authentication
Nonrepudiation*
Key distribution
Symmetric key cryptography
Encryption
No
Yes
No
No
No
Message authentication codes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Key transport
No
No
No
No
Yes-requires out-of-band initialization step or an HP
Secure hash functions
Message digest
Yes
No
No
No
No
HMAC
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Asymmetric cryptography
Digital signatures
Yes
No
Yes
Yes (with an HP)
No
Key transport
No
No
No
No
Yes
Key agreement
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

*Nonrepudiation ensures that no party can deny that it sent or received a message via encryption and/or digital signatures or approved some information.

Symmetric Cryptography
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/symmetric-cryptography

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128184271000112
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818427-1.00011-2
Security component fundamentals for assessment
Leighton Johnson, in Security Controls Evaluation, Testing, and Assessment Handbook (Second Edition), 2020
Symmetric
One method of cryptography is symmetric cryptography (also known as secret key cryptography or private key cryptography). Symmetric cryptography is best suited for bulk encryption because it is much faster than asymmetric cryptography. With symmetric cryptography:
Both parties share the same key (which is kept secret). Before communications begin, both parties must exchange the shared secret key. Each pair of communicating entities requires a unique shared key. The key is not shared with other communication partners.
Pros:
Speed/file size
Symmetric-key algorithms are generally much less computationally intensive which provides a smaller file size that allows for faster transmissions and less storage space.
Cons:
Key management
One disadvantage of symmetric-key algorithms is the requirement of a shared secret key, with one copy at each end. See drawing below.
To ensure secure communications between everyone in a population of n people a total of n (n − 1)/2 keys are needed. Example: key for 10 individuals 10(10-1)/2 = 45 keys.
The process of selecting, distributing, and storing keys is known as key management; it is difficult to achieve reliably and securely.
[Figure: comparing symmetric and asymmetric]


Asymmetric Cryptography
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/asymmetric-cryptography

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780128184271000112
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818427-1.00011-2
Security component fundamentals for assessment
Leighton Johnson, in Security Controls Evaluation, Testing, and Assessment Handbook (Second Edition), 2020
Asymmetric
Asymmetric cryptography is a second form of cryptography. Asymmetric cryptography is scalable for use in very large and ever expanding environments where data are frequently exchanged between different communication partners. With asymmetric cryptography:
Each user has two keys: a public key and a private key.
Both keys are mathematically related (both keys together are called the key pair).
The public key is made available to anyone. The private key is kept secret.
Both keys are required to perform an operation. For example, data encrypted with the private key is unencrypted with the public key. Data encrypted with the public key is unencrypted with the private key.
Encrypting data with the private key creates a digital signature. This ensures the message has come from the stated sender (because only the sender had access to the private key to be able to create the signature).
A digital envelope is signing a message with a recipient's public key. A digital envelope, which serves as a means of access control by ensuring that only the intended recipient can open the message (because only the receiver will have the private key necessary to unlock the envelope; this is also known as receiver authentication).
If the private key is ever discovered, a new key pair must be generated.
Asymmetric cryptography is often used to exchange the secret key to prepare for using symmetric cryptography to encrypt data. In the case of a key exchange, one party creates the secret key and encrypts it with the public key of the recipient. The recipient would then decrypt it with their private key. The remaining communication would be done with the secret key being the encryption key. Asymmetric encryption is used in key exchange, email security, Web security, and other encryption systems that require key exchange over the public network.

Pros:
Key management
Two keys (public and private), private key cannot be derived for the public, so the public key can be freely distributed without confidentially being compromised.
Offers: Digital signatures, integrity checks, and nonrepudiation.
Cons:
Speed/file size
Because symmetric-key algorithms are generally much less computationally intensive than asymmetric key algorithms.
In practice, asymmetric key algorithm are typically hundreds to thousands times slower than a symmetric key algorithm.

Cryptography
Jason Andress, in The Basics of Information Security, 2011
Asymmetric Cryptography
Although symmetric key cryptography makes use of only one key, asymmetric key cryptography, also known as public key cryptography, utilizes two keys: a public key and a private key. The public key is used to encrypt data sent from the sender to the receiver and is shared with everyone. We see public keys included in e-mail signatures, posted on servers that exist specifically to host public keys, posted on Web pages, and displayed in a number of other ways. Private keys are used to decrypt data that arrives at the receiving end and are very carefully guarded by the receiver. Complex mathematical operations are used to create the private and public keys. These operations are, at present, difficult enough that the means do not exist to reverse the private key from the public key. Asymmetric key cryptography was first described by Martin Hellman and Whitfield Diffie in their 1976 paper, “New Directions in Cryptography.”C
The main advantage of asymmetric key cryptography over symmetric key cryptography is the loss of the need to distribute the key. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, when we use a symmetric algorithm, we need to distribute the key in some way. We might do this by exchanging keys in person, sending a key in e-mail, or repeating it verbally over the phone, but we generally need to communicate the key in an out-of-band manner, meaning that we do not want to send the key with the message, as this would leave our message easily available to an eavesdropper. When we use asymmetric key cryptography, we have no need to share a single key. We simply make our public key easily available, and anyone who needs to send us an encrypted message makes use of it.

Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/diffie-hellman-key-exchange

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781558605466500314
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-155860546-6/50031-4
Encryption
Sharon K. Black Attorney-at-Law, in Telecommunications Law in the Internet Age, 2002
Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange
When a recipient's public key is not known and not available in a key server, or when the two parties wish to establish a session key in public, rather than in private, the parties may use a “key exchange.” In 1976, a year after the original public-key concept was developed, two of the developers, Diffie and Hellman, published a paper in IEEE Transactions entitled “New Directions in Cryptography,” in which they described a partial solution to these problems existing with the use of public-key cryptosystems.27 With the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange, for example, the following procedure is followed.
Parties A and B first send each other numbers (N1 and N2) to establish a session key.
In the session, Parties A and B then agree on a number (b) to serve as the basis for their calculations. This number does not have to be kept secret.
With the calculation number, parties agree on a large prime number, which will serve as their “modulus m” or base for arithmetic operations. Normally, we operate in “base ten,” while in binary we calculate in “base two.”
To add to their “base number,” the parties A and B select two secret large random numbers (A and B).
Party A then sends the number she calculates as [(b × A) modulus m] to Party B.
Party B reciprocates with [(b × B) modulus m].
Finally, both parties can then compute [b × AB], which becomes their secret session key for subsequent encryption of their information.

While this sounds complicated, it is easy to calculate, especially with computers, and yet very difficult to break. It works well for real-time communication, but imposes long delays as the parties exchange the six or more messages to generate a session key.

The Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange also provided an additional feature, the reality of ephemeral keys that changed the basic power relationships in cryptography because they allow two parties to create a secret key in a very public “conversation,” without the use of any centralized resources. Before public-key cryptography, encryption always required centralized facilities to manufacture and distribute equipment and keys—consistent with the military's top-down structure. After public-key encryption systems became available, businesses could communicate readily with each other even if the parties did not know each other or had never done business before.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780128182000000196
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818200-0.00019-6
Network Security
Larry L. Peterson, Bruce S. Davie, in Computer Networks (Sixth Edition), 2022
8.3.3 Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange
Another approach to establishing a shared secret key is to use the Diffie–Hellman key exchange protocol, which works without using any predistributed keys. The messages exchanged between Alice and Bob can be read by anyone able to eavesdrop, and yet the eavesdropper will not know the secret key that Alice and Bob end up with.
Diffie–Hellman does not authenticate the participants. Since it is rarely useful to communicate securely without being sure whom you are communicating with, Diffie–Hellman is usually augmented in some way to provide authentication. One of the main uses of Diffie–Hellman is in the Internet Key Exchange (IKE) protocol, a central part of the IP Security (IPsec) architecture.
The Diffie–Hellman protocol has two parameters, p and g, both of which are public and may be used by all the users in a particular system. Parameter p must be a prime number. The integers modp (short for modulo p) are 0 through p − 1, since xmodp is the remainder after x is divided by p, and form what mathematicians call a group under multiplication. Parameter g (usually called a generator) must be a primitive root of p: for every number n from 1 through p − 1 there must be some value k such that n=gkmodp. For example, if p were the prime number 5 (a real system would use a much larger number), then we might choose 2 to be the generator g, since
1=20modp,2=21modp,3=23modp,4=22modp.
