---
sidebar_position: 3
title: Generative aritificial intelligence
---

## Natural Language Processing

What is Natural Language Processing

Natural languages are the languages that humans use to communicate with each other, such as English, Arabic, and others.

The goal of this field is to make computers perform tasks that involve dealing with human language, or tasks that enable communication between humans and machines, or improve communication among humans, or simply perform useful processing of text or speech.

One example of such a useful task is the conversational agent, also known as Chatbots, which is an artificial agent capable of exercising advanced linguistic skills such as speaking and understanding language.

### Applications of Natural Language Processing

Spam Filtering.

Conversational Agent.

+ Speech recognition
+ Language analysis
+ Dialogue processing
+ Information retrieval
+ Text to speech

Question Answering.

Information Extraction.

Sentiment Analysis.

Machine Translation.

Bag Of Words Model

A problem with modeling text is that it is messy, and techniques like machine learning algorithms prefer well defined fixed-length inputs and outputs. Machine learning algorithms cannot work with raw text directly; the text must be converted into numbers. In language processing, the vectors x are derived from textual data, in order to reflect various linguistic properties of the text. This is called feature extraction or feature encoding. A popular and simple method of feature extraction with text data is called the bag-of-words. 

A language model is probability distribution over entire sentences or text. The bag-of-words (BOW) model is a representation that turns arbitrary text into fixed-length vectors by counting how many times each word appears. This process is often referred to as vectorization.

Suppose we wanted to vectorize the following:
+ the cat sat
+ the cat sat in the hat
+ the cat with the hat

We generally refer to each of these texts as a text document, so there are three text documents in this example.

### Text classification

Text classification is the task of assigning a set of predefined
categories to free text. Text classifiers can be used to organize and categorize almost anything. For example, new articles can be organized by topics, and user reviews can be organized by their sentiments and opinions.

## Large Language Models

What are Large Language Models?

Large language models are sophisticated artificial intelligence systems designed to understand and produce natural texts in a way that is very similar to the way humans communicate. These models are built on deep learning techniques, and are trained on huge datasets containing texts from various sources, such as books, articles, websites, and conversations. Through this training, the models learn language patterns and become able to generate new texts, answer questions, translate between languages, and perform other linguistic tasks with high efficiency.

It is an artificial intelligence model that determines the probability of a certain string of words being present in a sentence. When the model consists of a large number of parameters, it is called a large language model.

Large language models fall under a group of models known as foundation models, which are models trained on different data and can be adapted to perform a wide range of tasks.

### Large Language Models and traditional natural language models

Large language models differ from traditional natural language models in two important ways:

Data size and computing power

Large language models are trained on huge datasets of billions of words, and require enormous amounts of computational power and resources, such as thousands of graphics processing units (GPUs) or neural network processing units, for weeks or even months of time. While traditional natural language models use smaller data sets and rely on statistical analysis methods or specific linguistic rules, making them less dependent on huge computational resources.

Applications and uses

Large language models can be used for a wide range of tasks such as machine translation, automatic summarization, question answering, and creative content generation. Traditional natural language models are often limited in applications due to their limitations in understanding and generation, and are mainly used for specific tasks such as correcting spelling and grammatical errors.

## Generative Artificial Intelligence

What is Generative Artificial Intelligence?

Generative Artificial Intelligence is defined as a type of artificial intelligence technology aimed at generating new content, whether in the form of text, images, videos, or otherwise.

It has the ability to generate diverse and unlimited results beyond the training data. It provides unprecedented capabilities in various fields, generating unique and creative content without imitation and replication. It relies on advanced technologies such as Deep Neural Networks and Large Language Models.

### Capabilities of Generative Artificial Intelligence

+ Generating new images and graphics 
+ Enhancing and editing images and videos 
+ Composing new musical pieces or modifying existing ones 
+ Summarizing, editing, and critiquing texts 
+ Providing convincing answers to a variety of questions 
+ Conducting conversations in natural language 
+ Translating texts and speeches 
+ Writing or generating programming code

The difference between Generative AI models and other AI models

| Aspect | Generative AI models | Other AI models |
| --- | --- | --- |
| The goal and function | Creating new data similar to the data it was trained on, with the ability to generate new and innovative content. | Focuses on understanding or classifying existing data, or making decisions based on the data. |
| Applications and uses | It has wide applications in fields such as art, design, content creation, entertainment, and even in scientific research. | Widely used in fields such as data analysis, healthcare, finance, and cybersecurity. |
| Model flexibility and adaptability | It is characterized by its high flexibility and ability to adapt to various creative tasks without the need for retraining. | Specialized in specific tasks and requires specific training for each new application. |

### Benefits

Increased productivity

It helps save time and resources by automating content generation processes and reducing the need for intensive human input.

Improving services

Improving human interactions with devices and services by generating natural and convincing responses in automated chats and response systems, which enhances the customer experience.

Facilitating research and analysis

Analyzing patterns and trends in big data and providing possible interpretations.

Reducing costs

Reducing the cost of business operations through automation or enhancing capabilities.

Enhancing innovation

Generating new ideas for products or services and producing new and unique content.

### Challenges

Data quality

Resources

interpretability

Specialists

AI ethics

### Risks

hallucination

bias

privacy violation

intellectual property Rights

Security vulnerabilities

Prominent companies developing Generative AI models

Using Generative Artificial Intelligence

### Prompt Engineering

The process of formulating instructions and questions submitted to generative artificial intelligence tools. Learning command engineering techniques is extremely important, as formulating commands accurately and clearly helps generative artificial intelligence tools better understand what is required and thus generate high-quality content.

Specificity: Defining a clear goal for the conversation, whether it's to provide specific information or to answer a question. 

Clarity: Use clear, specific language that is easy to understand, and avoid ambiguous terms or phrases that may lead to confusion or misunderstanding.

Context: Ensure that commands fit the context of the conversation and the user's needs, and avoid raising topics out of context.

Creativity: Encourage generative AI to be creative and explore different solutions. 

1) Clarifying context: Clarifying the scope of your question and providing relevant context is essential to getting the best answers. Example: "Help me develop a digital marketing strategy for my small business selling mobile phones." vs. "What are some tips about online marketing?"

2) Role-play: To guide its responses, you can assign it a role. Example: "Describe the significance of the World War II as a historian."

3) Use Symbols: Using symbols to identify parts of the input text in order to provide clear instructions to the model regarding the text that requires translation or other tasks. Example: "summarize the following text “ text “ ".

4) Output Format: Determine the output format when writing the inputs to improve the model’s results and present them in a format appropriate to the user’s need. Example: "Write a comparison between Product A and Product B in a table."

5) Provide references: If we can provide a model with trusted information that is relevant to the current query, then we can instruct the model to use the provided information to compose its answer. Example: "Use the following attached pdf to answer question about smart cities "

6) Specify steps: Some tasks are best specified as a sequence of steps. Writing the steps out explicitly can make it easier for the model to follow them. Example:
   1) Analyze the tweets
   2) Classify each tweet as positive or negative
   3) Put the classification in a table
   4) Explain the percentage of positive and negative tweets"

7) Provide examples: It is highly beneficial to include examples in your prompts to influence the AI's response in the desired direction. Example: "Write an expression of hope in a way similar to the following text: “The best way to keep your hopes alive is to work hard at something you enjoy doing.”"