---
title: Chapter 4 Privacy
sidebar_position: 4
---

A combination of approaches-new laws, technical solutions, and privacy policies is required to balance the scales
1. Reasonable limits must be set on government and business access to personal information; laws
2. New information and communication technologies must be designed to protect rather than diminish privacy technical solutions
3. Appropriate corporate policies must be developed to set baseline standards for people’s privacy  policies
4. Education and communication are also essential

Today, in addition to protection from governments intrusion, people want and need privacy protection from private industry.

## Privacy

Right of privacy is "the right to be left alone—the most comprehensive of rights, and the right most valued by a free people."

Information privacy is the combination of communications privacy and data privacy
+ communications privacy is the ability to communicate with others without those communications being monitored by other persons or organizations
+ data privacy is the ability to limit access to one’s personal data in order to exercise control over that data and its use.

1. Data breaches
2. Electronic discovery
3. Consumer profiling
4. Workplace monitoring
5. Advanced surveillance technology
6. General Data Protection Regulation

## 1. Data breaches

Caused by:

Hackers i.e. breaking into a database

Failure to follow proper security procedures

Victims whose personal data was compromised during a data breach need to be informed so that they can take protective measures.

i.e. Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act Mandates that within 60 days after discovery of a data breach, each individual whose health information has been exposed must be notified and if a breach involves 500 or more people, notice must be provided to prominent media outlets.

The cost to an organization that suffers a data breach can be quite high—by some estimates nearly $200 for each record lost. 

Nearly half the cost is typically a result of lost business opportunity associated with the customers whose data has been lost due to the incident.

Other costs include public-relations-related costs to manage the firm’s reputation, and increased customer-support costs for information hotlines and credit monitoring services for victims.

## 2. Electronic Discovery (e-discovery)

Collection, preparation, review, and production of electronically stored information for use in criminal and civil actions and proceedings

Discovery is part of the pretrial phase of a lawsuit in which each party can obtain evidence from the other party by various means, including requests for the production of documents.

The purpose of discovery is to ensure that all parties will go to trial with as much knowledge as possible.

Electronically stored information: Any form of digital information stored on any form of electronic storage device

Example: Apple and Samsung were embroiled in a long-running dispute involving alleged patent infringement. During the litigation, the court cited Samsung for failing to circulate a comprehensive litigation hold instruction among its employees when it first anticipated litigation. According to the court, this failure resulted in the loss of emails from several key Samsung employees. Samsung then raised the same issue—Apple had neglected to implement a timely and comprehensive litigation hold to prevent broad destruction of pertinent email. A key learning from this case is that an organization should focus on its own electronically stored information preservation and production efforts before it raises issues with its opponent’s efforts.

## 3. Consumer profiling

Information about Web surfers can be obtained through the use of: 
+ Cookies
+ Tracking software

Outside of the Web environment, marketing firms employ similarly controversial means to collect information about people and their buying habits.

Each time a consumer uses a credit card, redeems frequent flyer points, fills out a warranty card, answers a phone survey, buys groceries using a store loyalty card, orders from a mail-order catalog, or registers a car with the DMV, the data is added to a storehouse of personal information about that consumer, which may be sold or shared with third parties.

Marketing firms aggregate the information they gather about consumers to build databases that contain a huge amount of consumer data. They want to know as much as possible about who they are,  what they like, how they behave and what motivates them to buy.

Criticism:
+ Personal data may be gathered and sold to other companies without the permission of consumers who provide the data. 
+ After the data has been collected, consumers have no way of knowing how it is used or who is using it.

## 4. Workplace Monitoring

Reasons for monitoring IT in the workplace:
1. Increase productivity Do you really work?
   + Recent study revealed that between 60 -80% of workers’ time online has nothing to do with work.
   + Another source estimates that, on average, workers spend about four or five hours per week on personal matters.
2. Decrease legal liabilities
   + Example 1: an employee may sue his or her employer for creating an environment conducive to sexual harassment if other employees are viewing pornography online while at work and the organization takes no measures to stop such viewing.
   + Example 2: Email containing crude jokes and cartoons or messages that discriminate against others based on sex, race, or national origin can also spawn lawsuits.

Many organizations have developed policies on the use of IT in the workplace in order to protect against employee abuses that reduce worker productivity or that expose the employer to harassment lawsuits.

Many employers monitor workers to ensure that corporate IT usage policies are being followed.

Many firms find it necessary to record and review employee communications and activities on the job, including phone calls, email, Web surfing, even videotaping employees on the job employ random drug testing psychological testing and this is perfectly Legal in most jurisdictions

Employees usually give explicit notice that email, Internet use, and files on company computers were not private and that their use might be monitored.

Society is struggling to define the extent to which employers should be able to monitor the work-related activities of employees.

On the one hand, employers want to be able to guarantee a work environment that is conducive to all workers, ensure a high level of worker productivity, and limit the costs of defending against privacy-violation lawsuits filed by disgruntled employees.

On the other hand, privacy advocates want:
   + federal legislation that keeps employers from infringing on the privacy rights of employees. Such legislation would require prior notification to all employees of the existence and location of all electronic monitoring devices.
   + restrictions on the types of information collected and the extent to which an employer may use electronic monitoring.

## 5. Advanced Surveillance Technology

Advocates of advanced surveillance technology argue that people have no legitimate expectation of privacy in a public place! Is it?

Critics raise concerns about the use of surveillance to secretly store images of people, creating a new potential for abuse, such as intimidation of political dissenters or blackmail of people caught with the “wrong” person or in the “wrong” place.

### Camera Surveillance

There are 4.2 million closed circuit TV cameras (CCTV) in operation throughout UK—which amounts to 1 CCTV camera for every 14 people.

China, by way of comparison, has 2.75 million cameras, or 1 camera for every 472,000 citizens.

Goal - Deter crime and terrorist activities

Criticism - May provide leeway for abuse and blackmail

In the US:

Domain Awareness system is a joint effort of the New York Police Department and Microsoft 

It costs $40 million

The system links together the city’s 3,000 surveillance cameras and 2,600 radiation detectors as well as license plate readers and NYPD computer records, including 911 calls

Goal is to combat terrorist activities and reduce the time required to respond to an incident

### Stalking apps

Technology has made it easy for a person to track the whereabouts of someone else at all times, without ever having to follow the person.

There is no law that prohibits a business from making an app whose primary purpose is to help one person track another, and anyone can purchase this software over the Internet.

However, it is illegal to install the software on a phone without the permission of the phone owner.

Any laws regarding Stalking in Saudi Arabia?

## 6. General Data Protection Regulation 

Fundamental changes to the way in which we seek, store and share information.

General Data Protection Regulation is replacement to EU Data Protection Directive 1995

The official website https://www.eugdpr.org/

General Data Protection Regulation gives EU citizens ultimate control over their personal data.

The main target is returning control of personal information back to the user

We now share an incredible amount of information about ourselves with the companies we interact with – from basic contact details through to credit card information, photos, messages and browsing preferences.

In the right hands, this data can be used to enhance our interactions with a company. 

In the wrong hands, it can be used for a range of criminal activities, from fraudulent payments through to full identity theft.

Source: http://www.bobsguide.com/guide/news/2017/Aug/30/the-impact-of-gdpr-what-are-the-regulations-objectives/

The aims of the new regulation is:
1. Creating a unified approach to data protection across EU.
2. Protecting EU citizens in the global economy. 
   + The GDPR is applicable to any company, no matter where it is based, that processes the personal data of EU citizens.
   + Giving individuals full control over all their personal data.
3. Improving levels of compliance.
   + The GDPR introduces significant penalties, and companies that fail to meet their regulatory obligations face fines of up to 4% of annual global turnover, or EUR 20 million, whichever is greater.

Source: http://www.bobsguide.com/guide/news/2017/Aug/30/the-impact-of-gdpr-what-are-the-regulations-objectives/

Some of the GDPR features:
+ You have just 72 hours after learning of a data breach to send a data breach notification to your national regulator.
+ Fines could reach 4% of your annual global turnover (this means revenue, not profits). Or €20 million, whichever is greater.
+ New rights for individuals have been created such as the right to have their data deleted (the right to erasure), the right to move their data to another organisation (the right to data portability) and the right to object to the processing of their data, among others.